of 70 
 Pharmacovigilance Guidance Document 
for 
Marketing Authorization Holders of Pharmaceutical 
Products 
 
Effective Date: 
 
Version: 2.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by; 
National Coordination Centre-Pharmacovigilance Programme of India, 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission in collaboration with Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Government of India

DISCLAIMER 
 
 
The Pharmacovigilance Guidance Document for Marketing Authorization 
Holders (MAHs) of Pharmaceutical Products in India is a regulatory guidance 
document. These guidelines are for the guidance of all stakeholders and are not 
meant to substitute or rephrase the rules made under the Drugs and Cosmetic 
Act, 1940 & Rules, 1945 or any other relevant Act and are subject to being in 
conformity with the Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 & Rules, 1945 including New 
Drugs & Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 (NDCT Rules, 2019) as amended from time 
to time. 
This document facilitates MAHs to set up a Pharmacovigilance System at their 
organization as per the recent amendment in Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 & 
Rules, 1945 . This document will help in uniformity of Pharmacovigilance System 
in India, Preparation of Pharmacovigilance System Master File by MAHs, Post 
Marketing Surveillance of Pharmaceutical Products, Preparation & Submission 
of Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR), Quality Management System (QMS) at 
MAH site, Audits and Inspection of Pharmacovigilance System at MAH site and 
submission of Risk Management Plan by MAH . In the event of any dispute as 
regard to the content of this document and the statues, the statutory provisions 
shall prevail. In case, there is an anomaly between the content of this document 
and any other statutory/official document, the decision of the Government of 
India or the implementing authority shall prevail.

PREFACE 
 
This Pharmacovigilance Guidance Document for MAHs of Pharmaceutical 
Products in India is in accordance with the objective of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 & Rules, 1945 including NDCT Rules 2019. This guidance document is 
prepared by the National Coordination Centre (NCC)-Pharmacovigilance 
Programme of India (PvPI), Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC) in 
collaboration with Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) to 
facilitate submission of the safety profile of drugs by MAHs involved in the 
manufacture, sale, import and distribution of pharmaceutical products in India. 
This guidance document defines the roles & responsibilities of CDSCO, 
State(s)/UT(s) Drugs Controller, NCC-PvPI, IPC and MAHs in preparation of 
Pharmacovigilance System Master File by MAHs, Post Marketing Surveillance 
of Pharmaceutical Products, Preparation & Submission of Periodic Safety 
Update Report (PSUR), Quality Management System (QMS) at MAH site, Audits 
and Inspection of Pharmacovigilance System at MAH site and submission of 
Risk Management Plan, wherever applicable. This guidance document also 
provides assistance to MAHs on establishing and ensuring an effective 
Pharmacovigilance System at their site. This guidance document may be 
amended from time to time after obtaining necessary approvals from the 
concerned authorities.

of 70 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. Abbreviations 
2. Introduction 
a) Objectives 
b) Scope 
3. Roles & Responsibilities of Authorities 
a) Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) 
b) State(s)/UT(s) Drugs Controller 
c) National Coordination Centre-Pharmacovigilance Programme of 
India, Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission  
4. Chapters 
Chapter 1: Pharmacovigilance System Master File 
Chapter 2: Collection, Processing and Reporting of Individual Case 
Safety Report (ICSR) by Marketing Authorization Holder 
(MAH) 
Chapter 3: Preparation & Submission of Periodic Safety Update Report 
by MAH 
Chapter 4: Quality Management System at MAH site 
Chapter 5: Audits & Inspections of Pharmacovigilance System at MAH 
site 
Chapter 6: Submission of Risk Management Plan 
5. References 
6. Appendices 
Appendix A 
Appendix B 
Appendix C 
Appendix D

of 70 
 Appendix E 
 
 
1. Abbreviations 
ADR  Adverse Drug Reaction  
AE Adverse Event  
AEFI  Adverse Event Following Immunization  
AIIMS  All India Institute of Medical Sciences  
AMC  Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring Centre  
CAPA Corrective And Preventive Action 
CCDS  Company Core Data Sheet  
CCSI  Company Core Safety Information  
CDSCO  Central Drugs Standard Control Organization  
CIOMS  Council for International Organizations of Medical 
Sciences  
CRO  Contract Research Organization  
CT Clinical Trial  
DCG (I)  Drugs Controller General (India)  
DHPC  Direct Healthcare Professional Communication  
E2B  Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety 
Report  
EUA  Emergency Use Authorization  
FDA  Food and Drugs Administration  
GoI Government of India  
GVP  Good Pharmacovigilance Practices 
HCP  Healthcare Professional  
HQ Head Quarter  
 
ICH  International Council for Harmonization of 
Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for 
Human Use  
ICSR  Individual Case Safety Report  
IPC Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission  
MAHs  Marketing Authorization Holders  
MoH& FW Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  
NCC  National Coordination Centre

of 70 
  
PSUR Periodic Safety Update Report 
PT Preferred Term  
PvPI Pharmacovigilance Programme of India  
PV Pharmacovigilance  
PSMF Pharmacovigilance System Master File  
PVOIC  Pharmacovigilance Officer In-charge  
QMS  Quality Management System  
RMP  Risk Management Plan  
RSI Reference Safety Information  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
SJS Stevens Johnson Syndrome  
 SOC  System Organ Class  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
SmPCs  Summary of Product Characteristics  
SUSAR  Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction  
UMC  Uppsala Monitoring Centre  
UT Union Territory  
WHO  World Health Organization  
XML  Extensible Markup Language  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NRA National Regulatory Authority  
PBRER  Periodic Benefit-Risk Evaluation Report  
PIL Prescribing Information Leaflet  
PMS  Post Marketing Surveillance

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
2. Introduction 
 
India is one of the largest producers of quality medicines and also has robust 
Pharmacovigilance System to monitor the safety profile of marketed 
pharmaceutical products . The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW), Government of India re-casted Pharmacovigilance Programme 
of India shifting the National Coordination Centre at Indian Pharmacopoeia 
Commission in April 2011. NCC-PvPI, IPC is receiving Individual Case 
Safety Reports (ICSRs) from the stakeholders including Marketing 
Authorization Holders across the country. This guidance document facilitates 
MAHs to setup & implementation of uniform Pharmacovigilance System for 
pharmaceutical products in the Indian market in post-licensure period. 
This guidance document uses the following key terms; 
Pharmacovigilance (PV): 
PV defined as science and activities relating to the detection, collation, 
assessment, understanding and prevention of Adverse Event (AE) or any 
other drug related problem. 
Marketing Authorization Holders (MAHs): 
MAHs refers to the manufacturer or the importer of the drug, who has valid 
manufacturing or import licence. 
After marketing authorization of new drug, the safety profile may show 
variation from that in clinical trial from patient to patient and therefore, 
MAH has to be carefully monitored for a specific period to submit the PSUR. 
As per the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 & Rules, 1945 including NDCT 
Rules, 2019, the PSURs are required to be submitted every six months for 
first two years from the date of approval and for subsequent two years 
annually. The Licensing Authority may extend the total duration of 
submission of PSUR, if it is considered necessary in the interest of public 
health. 
In some specific condition, the early introduction of a new drug/vaccine is 
permitted, even if the complete clinical trial data as per the approved 
protocol is not available. This is based on the careful assessment of expected 
benefit & potential risk from limited number of subjects/patients. This is 
often referred to as Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). In COVID- 19

of 70 
 pandemic, several vaccines and drugs were approved under EUA . In EUA, it 
is imperative that each EUA case is meticulously followed for any AE. 
Thus, the reporting of any AE is important for continued risk-benefit 
evaluation of drug. This guidance document provides critical information for 
reporting AE by MAHs without any failure, accurate ly within stipulated 
time to NCC-PvPI, IPC and National Regulatory Authority (i.e. CDSCO). 
This guidance document does not deal with medical devices and veterinary 
products. 
 
a) Objectives 
 
The Pharmacovigilance Guidance Document for MAHs has the following 
objectives; 
1. To assist and facilitate MAHs of pharmaceutical products for reporting all 
AEs accurately, efficiently and timely to NCC-PvPI, IPC and CDSCO. 
2. To establish a uniform PV System at MAHs site across the country by; 
 Preparation of Pharmacovigilance System Master File 
 Collecti ng, Processing and Reporting of Individual Case Safety 
Report (ICSR) by Marketing Authorization Holder (MAH) 
 Preparation & Submission of Periodic Safety Update Report by 
MAH 
 Implementation of Quality Management System at MAH site 
 Audits & Inspections of Pharmacovigilance System at MAH site 
 Preparation and Submission of Risk Management Plan 
b) Scope 
The scope of document covers the following category of pharmaceutical 
products: 
 Drugs, New Drugs and Subsequently approved drugs 
 Biologics including Biosimilars, Vaccines, Cell lines/culture-based 
products etc. (Refer “Guidance for industry on PV Requirements for 
Biological Products ” by CDSCO for vaccines along with this 
guidance documents) 
 Radiopharmaceuticals 
 Phytopharmaceuticals Products 
 
3. Role & Responsibilities of Different Authorities 
In the context of Pharmacovigilance of Pharmaceutical Products, following are 
the authorities: - 
The Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) under Directorate 
General of Health Services in Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MoHFW), Government of India (GoI) is the National Regulatory Authority

of 70 
 (NRA) responsible for approval of new drugs, conduct of clinical trials, 
enforcement of the standards for drugs, control over the quality of imported 
drugs in the country and coordination of the activities of State Drugs Control 
Organizations by providing expert advice with a view to bring the uniformity in 
the enforcement and implementation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and 
Rules 1945, their under. 
 The Drugs Controller General of India, DCG(I), is the chairman of the steering 
committee of   Pharmacovigilance Programme of India. The CDSCO receives the 
drug safety related recommendation from the PvPI for taking appropriate 
regulatory actions.  
The National Coordination Centre (NCC) at IPC has been established to conduct 
Pharmacovigilance under Pharmacovigilance Programme of India. Various ADR 
monitoring centres have been established in various medical colleges across the 
country, which are reporting to PvPI at IPC. 
As a condition of the marketing authorization, the MAH is also required to 
submit PSUR after licensure of the pharmaceutical product. The PSURs are to 
be submitted every six months for first two years of the approval and for 
subsequent two years annually. The Licensing Authority may extend the total 
duration of submission of PSURs if it is considered necessary in the interest of 
public health. The compiled PSUR data should then be reviewed by CDSCO.  
Based on review, regulatory decisions are taken by CDSCO on safety and efficacy 
of the pharmaceutical products.  
CDSCO is responsible to take appropriate regulatory decision on the basis of 
recommendations of Signal Review Panel (SRP) of NCC-PvPI. CDSCO is also 
responsible to take regulatory decisions on the basis of analysis of the PSUR 
data. Evidence-based information is utilized for appropriate regulatory deci sions 
by the CDSCO such as changing/updating Prescribing Information Leaflet (PIL), 
issuing drug alerts, and signals, etc. if any. 
Licensing Authority: 
Drugs fall under the Concurrent List of the 7th Schedule of Constitution of India. 
Drugs & Cosmetics Act is a Central Act enforced both by the Central and State 
Governments. Every State and Union Territory of India has its own Drugs 
Regulatory Authorities. The State Drugs Controllers are primarily responsible 
for licensing of manufacturing and sale/distribution of drugs. 
As per the requirements under sub para (2) of Schedule M (Good Manufacturing 
Practices and requirements of premises, plant and equipment for pharmaceutical 
products) of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and Rules 1945 there under 
mentioned as under, "Reports of serious adverse drug reactions resulting from

of 70 
 the use of a drug along with comments and documents shall be forthwith 
reported to the concerned licensing authority."  
It is required under Rule that MAH should monitor Adverse Drug Reactions/ 
complaints related to the drugs marketed in the country and report to the 
Licensing authority. The MAHs are also encouraged to report all adverse events 
to NCC-PvPI (IPC). 
National Coordination Centre-Pharmacovigilance Programme of India, 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission 
Pharmacovigilance Programme of India was operationalized in July, 2010 by 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India with a 
mission to safeguard the health of Indian population by ensuring that the 
benefits of use of medicine outweigh the risks associated with its use. The 
AIIMS, New Delhi was established as National Coordination Centre (NCC) for 
PvPI. Later on, MoHFW, GoI on 15th April 2011, recasted this programme and 
shifted the NCC from AIIMS, New Delhi to Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission 
(IPC), Ghaziabad. 
IPC was created to set standards of drugs in the country. Its basic function is to 
regularly update the standards of drugs. The standards of drugs are updated by 
adding new and revising the existing monographs through Indian 
Pharmacopoeia (IP). It further promotes rational use of medicines by publishing 
National Formulary of India (NFI). 
The IPC as a National Coordination Centre (NCC) for PvPI has been working in 
collaboration with national and international stakeholders, ensuring patient's 
safety by monitoring ADRs. The NCC-PvPI, IPC also participates in the 
Programme for International Drug Monitoring by contributing ADRs to Uppsala 
Monitoring Centre (UMC), Sweden, a WHO-collaboration Centre. NCC-PvPI is 
also working as a WHO Collaborating Centre for Pharmacovigilance in Public 
Health Programmes and Regulatory Services since, July 2017. 
The PvPI has succeeded in establishing AMCs across the major parts of the 
country, upgrading capacity- building and training to the stakeholders, besides 
encouraging hospitals, individuals and civil society to participate in PvPI. 
Several tools and methods have been introduced by the PvPI to report ADR in 
Hindi, English and other vernacular languages, mobile apps, helpline - 
18001803024 (Toll-free), etc. PVPI has also been coordinating with Public Heal th 
Programmes (PHPs) such as National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme 
(NTEP), National Aids Control Programme (NACP) and National Centre for 
Vector-Borne Diseases Control (NCVBDC). 
There are following expert ’s panels/committees under PvPI:  -

 Steering Committee 
 Working Group 
 Signal Review Panel 
 Core Training Panel 
 Quality Review Panel 
The PvPI has a system to collect, collate and analyze drug safety data from 
Indian population, which is submitted to CDSCO for appropriate regulatory 
decision, States/UTs drug regulatory authorities to promote and protect public 
health. 
 
Figure I : PvPI-Programme Communication

B. CHAPTERS 
 
Chapter 1 - Pharmacovigilance System Master File 
Chapter 2 - Collection, Processing & Reporting of Individual Case Safety Report 
Chapter 3 - Preparation & Submission of Periodic Safety Update Report 
Chapter 4 - Quality Management System at MAH's organization 
Chapter 5 - Audits and Inspections of Pharmacovigilance systems at MAH's   
                    Organization 
Chapter 6 - Submission of Risk Management Pl an

CHAPTER 1 
 
Pharmacovigilance System Master File (PSMF) 
 
Contents: 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Scope 
1.3 Contents of the PS MF 
1.3.1 Pharmacovigilance personnel and their responsibilities  
1.3.2 Pharmacovigilance organization structure 
1.3.3 Sources of safety data 
1.3.4 Pharmacovigilance processes 
1.3.5 Pharmacovigilance system performance 
1.4 Annexures to the PS MF

of 70 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pharmacovigilance System Master File 
 
1.1 Introduction 
The Pharmacovigilance System Master File (PSMF) provides a description of the 
pharmacovigilance system used by the MAH with respect to pharmaceutical 
products marketed by them. The PSMF is not a part of the marketing 
authorization (MA) dossier and is maintained independently from the MA. 
1.2 Scope 
The scope of this chapter is to provide guidance for MAH to create and maintain 
the PSMF at their site. This describes the different documents to be created, 
updated , controlled, archived and traceable, whenever required.  
1.3 Contents of the PSMF 
The PSMF should contain all information related to MAH ’s PV system and cover 
the following sections: 
1.3.1  Pharmacovigilance personnel and their responsibilities : - 
A qualified and trained personnel should be authorized by the company 
management as Pharmacovigilance Officer In-charge (PVOIC) with 
responsibilities for dealing PV activities at MAH's organization. The PVOIC 
should be a medical or pharmacy professional trained in the collection and 
analysis of AE reports. The PVOIC shall be responsible for the following: 
 Development of training modules and organizing training for staff of PV 
department; 
 Identification of PV activities and framing of SOPs, revision of SOPs; 
 Establishment and maintenance of QMS of PV department;

of 70 
  The PVOIC should reside in India and respond to queries of regulatory 
authorities including PvPI, IPC whenever required. The information 
related to the PVOIC provided in the PSMF should include: 
•Contact details (Name, address, phone, e -mail); 
•Summary, curriculum vitae with the key information on the role of the PVOIC;  
•A description of the responsibilities guaranteeing that the PVOIC has sufficient 
authority over the PV system in order to promote, maintain and improve 
compliance; 
•Details of Person -in-charge to work in the absence of PVOIC; 
 
1.3.2  Pharmacovigilance Organization Structure  
 
1.3.2.1  Marketing Authorization Holder 
The Pharmacovigilance system organogram at MAH site should be included in 
the PSMF. The authorized signatory should be clearly indicated. The description 
of PV system at MAH site should be provided in PSMF. 
1.3.2.2  Contract Research Organization  
If, MAH assigns the responsibilities of PV activities of their pharmaceutical 
products to any CRO, then the information of the company(ies) including their 
allied PV departments involved and the relationship(s) between Contract 
Research Organizations & operational units relevant to the fulfilment of PV 
obligations should be provided. It should include: 
 The PV organizational structure of the CRO's showing the organogram of 
the PV department.; 
 Name & address of the organization, where the PV functions are 
undertaken such as collection of AEs, ICSRs processing, preparation & 
submission of PSURs, signal detection, Risk Management Plan (RMP), 
post-marketing surveillance and management of safety variations; 
 Delegated activities (contracts and agreements); 
 Service providing system (e.g., medical information, auditors, patient 
support programme providers, study data management etc.); 
 Commercial arrangements (distributors, licensing partners, co-marketing 
etc.); 
 Technical providers (hosting of computer systems and validation etc.)

of 70 
  1.3.3 Sources of safety data 
The PVOIC will be responsible to collect data, reports, publications related to 
safety of all pharmaceutical products marketed by the MAH. The main sources 
for safety data will be as follows: 
 Medical information inquiries; 
 "Contact us" emails, website inquiry forms and helpline etc.; 
 Pharmaceutical Product market complaints-Receipt, handling and 
disposal; 
 MAH employees involved in PV activities; 
 Spontaneous information from patient or their care givers and follow up 
of information; 
 Published literature; 
 Spontaneous reporting by HCPs; 
 Reports from internet , digital media or social media; 
 Patient-support programmes; 
 Reports from National Regulatory Authorities; 
 Contract partners involved in PV activities; 
1.3.4 Pharmacovigilance Processes 
1.3.4.1 Description 
A description and flow-diagram of the entire PV process, data handling, records 
control and archives of PV performance and covering the following aspects 
should be included in the PSMF: 
 The procedures for ICSR collection, collation, processing, assessment, 
reporting and follow-up; should clarify the activities; 
 Compilation of all ICSR and preparation & submission of PSURs of new 
drugs in accordance with the New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 
as amended from time to time; 
 Review of ICSR, detection of signal (if any), Drug Safety Alerts, CAPA; 
 Communication of Drug safety concerns to Consumers, HCPs, PvPI and 
the National Regulatory Authorities; 
 SmPCs and PILs with history of revisions 
1.3.4.2 SOPs should include the following: 
 Description of the process, data handling and records of PV performance;

of 70 
  ICSR collection, collation, follow-up, assessment and reporting; 
 PSUR scheduling, preparation and submission; 
 Quality issue, recall or withdrawal of pharmaceutical products; 
 Training procedures, evaluations and documentations; 
 Signal detection and evaluation process; 
 Communication of safety concerns to consumers, HCPs and regulatory 
authorities; 
 Implementation of safety variations in PILs/SmPCs; 
 Safety data exchange agreements, if any; 
 Safety data archival and retrieval; 
 PV audit & inspections; 
 Quality Control for PV activities; 
1.3.4.3 Computerized systems and database 
The location, functionality and operational responsibility for computerized 
systems and databases for receiving, collating and reporting safety information 
should be described in PSMF. Validation status of computer system functionality 
with change control, if any; nature of testing; back-up procedures should also be 
described. The MAH can have data collection in Excel spreadsheets to record and 
track the data. 
1.3.4.4 QMS in Pharmacovigilance 
The QMS should be established in PV activities, which should include: 
• Document and record control: The MAHs should retain the soft copy 
back-up of all PV documents for indefinite time and hard copies for at least 
10 years. The MAHs shall maintain a logbook for recording primary 
information received for every Adverse Events reported. 
• Trainings: A summary of trainings records and files should be available at 
the PV site of MAH. Staff should be appropriately trained for performing PV-
related activities, including any individual, who may receive safety reports. 
• Auditing: The QA of the company should supervise/facilitate the internal & 
external audits of PV system. The audit report must be documented within 
the quality system; with a brief description of the CAPA associated with the 
significant findings, the date it was identified and the anticipated resolution

date(s) with cross reference to the audit report and the documented CAPA 
plan(s). 
1.3.5  Pharmacovigilance System Performance 
The key indicators for the performance of PV system e.g., number and quality of 
ICSRs, CAPA needs to be identified and measured for annual trend analysis. 
The PSMF should contain evidence of the ongoing monitoring of the PV system 
performance including compliance of the main PV output. The PSMF should 
include a description of the monitoring methods applied and contain as a 
minimum the following: 
• An explanation of how the correct reporting of ICSRs is assessed. In the 
annexure, figures/graphs should be provided to show the timelines of 
submission; 
• A description of any metrics used to monitor the quality of submissions and 
performance of PV. This should include information provided by the 
regulatory authority regarding the quality of ICSR reporting, PSURs or 
other submissions; 
• An overview of the timelines of PSUR reporting; 
• An overview of the methods used to ensure the timelines of safety variation 
submissions compared to internal and competent authority deadlines 
including the tracking of required safety variations that have been identified 
but not yet submitted; 
• Wherever applicable, an overview of adherence to RMP commitments, or 
other obligations or conditions of marketing authorization(s) relevant to PV. 
1.4 Annexures to the PSMF 
 
• A list of pharmaceutical products including the name of the 
pharmaceutical product , active substance(s) and excipients; 
 
• A list of contract agreements covering delegated activities including the  
   pharmaceutical products; 
 
• A list of tasks delegated by the PVOIC for PV; 
 
• A list of all completed audits (regulatory as well as internal) and a list of

CHAPTER-2 
 
Collection, Collation, Processing & Reporting of Individual Case Safety Reports 
 
Contents: 
 
2.1 Introduction 
 
2.2 Structure & Processes 
 
2.3 Literature monitoring 
 
2.4 Follow-up of ICSR 
 
2.5 Processing of ICSR 
 
2.6 Reporting of ICSR 
 
2.7 Coding of Adverse Event & Indication 
 
2.8 Reporting time lines 
 
2.9 Causality assessment 
 
2.10 Special Population

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Introduction  
This section highlights the general principles for the Collection, Collation, 
Processing & Reporting of Individual Case Safety Reports associated with 
pharmaceutical products for human use. 
2.2 Structure & Processes 
 
2.2.1  Collection and Collation of ICSR 
The MAHs will collect the Adverse Events of their marketed pharmaceutical 
products from different sources. The following sources/methods required to be 
established by MAHs to strengthen spontaneous reporting. 
2.2.1.1  Medical inquiries 
The MAHs should have a process in place to record all the medical inquiri es 
related to their pharmaceutical products and documents including follow-up 
information or clarifications with a patient/consumer or HCPs. For inquiries that 
relate to safety of the pharmaceutical product, MAHs should ensure that there is 
a mechanism in place to transfer details of such cases to the PV point of contact.  
2.2.1.2  “Contact us ”, e-mails and website inquiry forms 
The MAH should consider the mechanism(s) by which incoming information via 
"Contact us" on their MAH portal, through e mail addresses and website inquiry 
forms is monitored to allow the identification and transfer of PV data to the 
designated PV person in an appropriate time frame to meet the regulatory 
requirement. 
2.2.1.3  MAH ’s employees 
The employees of the MAH designated for the PV work, should be trained timely 
on the type of the information received and data collected from the various

of 70 
 sources. These employees should be well versed in dealing with the information 
i.e., how to report particular Adverse Events? The data captured manually by the 
medical representative during a discussion with HCP regarding an AE or other 
safety related issue should be retained and he/she should be aware of reporting 
the same to the PV personnel of the respected MAHs. 
2.2.1.4  Contractual partners 
There could be different types of contractual arrangements existing in the 
pharmaceutical industry like loan licensing, contract manufacturing, 
distribution etc. The responsibilities regarding PV activities among partners 
should be clearly defined in a drug safety data exchange agreement. Contractual 
partners are a potential source of ICSR and mechanisms should be in place for 
the exchange of these ICSR in an appropriate manner & timeframe to meet 
regulatory requirements. 
2.2.1.5  Information on Adverse Events from the internet or digital 
media 
The MAHs should regularly screen relevant websites or digital media (including 
newspapers) or social media under their management or responsibility for 
potential reports of Adverse Events. The frequency of the screening should allow 
for potential valid ICSR to be reported to the competent authorities within the 
appropriate reporting timeframe based on the date of the information was posted 
on the website/digital media. MAHs may also consider utilizing their 
websites/portals to facilitate the collection of Adverse Event s. 
2.2.1.6  Solicited reports 
As defined in ICH-E2D, solicited reports of suspected ADRs are those derived 
from organized data collection systems, which include clinical trials, non-
interventional studies, registries, post-approval named patient use programmes, 
other patient support and disease management programmes, surveys of patients 
or healthcare providers, compassionate use or name patient use, or information 
gathering on efficacy or patient compliance. Reports of suspected ADRs obtained 
from any of these data collection systems should not be considered spontaneous. 
2.2.1.7  Miscellaneous sources for reporting  
The MAH should have other methods like e-mail, fax, online submission, mobile 
app, helpline, postal letters etc. to report Adverse Events. Patient identity should 
be kept confidential. 
2.3 Literature Monitoring 
The scientific and medical literature is a significant source of information for 
monitoring the safety and benefit-risk profile of pharmaceutical products,

of 70 
 particularly in relation to the detection of new safety signals or emerging safety 
issues. MAHs should perform monthly literature review of their pharmaceutical 
products by using electronic literature data base (such as PubMed, Science 
Direct, Scopus etc.). Any AE identified by this process need to be processed as 
per spontaneous ICSR. The MAHs are advised to submit ICSR to NCC-PvPI 
along with the complete literature reference including Digital Object Identifier 
(DOI) or copy of full-length article, wherever feasible. 
2.4 Follow-up of ICSR 
When initial ICSR  is received, the information on Adverse Event may be 
incomplete. Thus, the ICSR should be followed up as necessary to obtain the 
required information (Refer section 2.6.1, Essential data element of ICSR) 
required for clinical evaluation of the ICSR.  
For serious ICSRs, at least two follow-up attempts must be made and 
documented. For non-serious ICSRs, at least one follow-up attempt must be 
made and documented. While reporting to PvPI, the MAH should clearly indicate 
that the reported ICSR is either initial or follow up. 
2.5 Processing of ICSR 
2.5.1  ICSR receipt 
2.5.1 .1 Date of receipt  
The MAH should record the date of receipt for each Adverse Events; this applies 
to both initial notification and any follow-up communication. 
2.5.1.2 Validation of reports 
All reports of Adverse Events should be validated by authorized signatories of 
MAHs before reporting them to the NCC-PvPI, IPC & National Regulatory 
Authority.  
2.6 Reporting of ICSR  
Only valid ICSR would qualify for reporting to NCC- PvPI  & National Regulatory 
Authority . Each valid ICSR should have the following minimum criter ia for 
reporting: - 
1. An identifiable patient (one or more identifier such as, patient initial, age, 
gender, weight); 
2. An Adverse Event  
3. A suspected pharmaceutical product; 
4. An identifiable reporter (source);

of 70 
 The fields to describe the above four criteria are as follows: - 
2.6.1  Identifiable patient should have the following information:  
 Patient Initials: Write first letters of name & surname e.g., Vipin Sharma 
should be written as VS. 
 Age or date of birth: Write either the date of birth (DD/MM/YYYY) or age 
of the patient at the time of an Adverse Event occurred. 
 Gender: Male/Female/Transgender 
 Weight: In case of adult (in Kg) and in case of infant use value up to two 
decimals. 
Note: If any of this information is missing, the ICSR will still be considered. 
Any one of the above can define the identifiable patient for case processing. 
2.6.2 An Adverse Event 
 Date of onset of adverse event 
 Date of stop of adverse event 
 Describe adverse event: Provide the description of the reaction in terms of 
nature, localization, etc. e.g patient developed erythematous 
maculopapular rash over upper and lower limb. 
2.6.3 A suspected pharmaceutical product 
1. The details of suspected medication(s) such as drug name (brand or 
generic), Batch No/Lot No., expiry date, marketing authorization holder, 
dose, route, frequency, dates of therapy started & stopped, and indication 
should be provided. 
    2. Action Taken  with respect to suspect medication/medical product 
after adverse event:  
         Mention the status of action taken at the time of Adverse Event reporting 
as- 
 Drug withdrawn –Was the suspect medication discontinued?   
 Dose reduced – Was the dose of suspected medication reduced after the 
occurrence of Adverse Event? 
 Dose increased – In certain situations, there may be lack of therapeutic 
efficacy of a medication. They are not normally reported. Medical products 
used in critical conditions or for life threatening diseases, vaccines, 
contraceptives, etc. non effectiveness is also regarded as an adverse event. 
 Dose not changed – Was the suspected medication continued? 
 Unknown – Where information is not known?

 Not Applicable – Such as case of chemotherapy, vaccination, anesthetic 
agents etc. (given in one dose or in cycle).  
3. Re-challenge details:  Mention the status on re-challenge as- 
 'Yes' -If, the adverse drug reaction reappeared after re-introduction of 
suspected medication. 
 'No'- If, the adverse drug reaction did not reappear after re-introduction 
of suspected medication. 
 'Effect unknown'- When the above information is not available 
 Dose - In some cases, when the suspect product is re-introduced, in those 
cases the dose given to the patient must be specified.  
4. Concomitant drugs: The details like dose, route, frequency of all 
concomitant drugs should be provided in the same manner as that of suspected 
drugs including self-medication, Over the Counter medication, herbal 
medications, etc. with therapy dates.  
5. Relevant tests/ laboratory data/investigation:  Mention relevant 
laboratory tests /investigation data before & after Adverse Events. 
6.Other relevant history:  The relevant medical history of patient  including 
pre-existing medical conditions (e.g., allergies, pregnancy, smoking, alcohol use, 
hepatic/ renal dysfunction) and concurrent condition, if any. 
7. Seriousness of the reaction:  If, any adverse drug reaction is serious in 
nature, tick the appropriate reason for seriousness as- 
 Death: If, the patient died, mention the cause and date of death.   
 Life-threatening: If, the patient was at substantial risk of dying at the 
time of Adverse Events.  
 Hospitalization /prolongation of existing hospitalization: If, 
Adverse Events caused hospitalization or increased the hospital stay of 
the patient. 
 Disability: If, Adverse Events resulted in a substantial disruption of a 
person's ability to conduct normal life functions. 
 Congenital anomaly: If, exposure of the drug prior to conception or 
during pregnancy may have resulted in a birth defect.  
 Other medically important condition: When the event does not fit to 
above conditions, but the event may have put the patient at risk and 
required medical or surgical intervention to prevent any one of the above

of 70 
 8. Outcomes: Tick the outcome of the adverse event at the time of reporting as-  
 Recovered/resolved: If, the patient recovered/resolved from the 
adverse event. 
 Not recovered/not resolved:  If, the patient did not 
recover/resolve from the adverse event. 
 Recovering/resolving:  If, the patient is recovering/resolving from 
the adverse event. 
 Fatal:  If, the patient died. 
 Recovered/resolved with sequelae:  If, the patient has 
completely recovered from the adverse event (mention the date of 
recovery) or recovered with sequelae (e.g., scar). 
 Unknown:  If, the outcome is not known. 
 
2.6.4 An identifiable reporter (source); 
 Name & address:  A reporter must mention his/her name, address and 
contact details. The identity of the reporter will be maintained 
confidential. 
 Date of report:  Mention the date on which he/she reported the Adverse 
Events. 
 Reporter qualification:  Qualification of the reporter need to be 
mentioned. 
 
2.7 Coding of Adverse Event 
 
For the purpose of ICSR reporting (expedited and periodic) to National 
Regulatory Authority/NCC-PvPI, IPC, Marketing Authorization Holders are 
required to code Adverse Events, Indication preferably using latest version of 
MedDRA. 
 
2.8 Reporting time lines 
 All Serious Adverse Events must be reported by MAH within 15 calendar 
days of receipt of information from any source, to 
 
(a) National Regulatory Authority (NRA), i.e, CDSCO through email - 
sae@cdsco.nic.in 
     (b) National Coordination Centre, Pharmacovigilance Programme of India,         
           Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission through email mah.nccpvpi-
ipc@gov.in. 
All Non-Serious Adverse Events must be reported by MAH within 30 calendar 
days of receipt of information from any source, to

of 70 
        (a) National Regulatory Authority (NRA), i.e, CDSCO through email – 
dci@nic.in , pharma.covig@cdsco.nic.in 
       (b) National Coordination Centre, Pharmacovigilance Programme of India,         
           Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission through email mah.nccpvpi-ipc@gov.in 
Note: The adverse events due to lack of efficacy, medication error etc. must also 
be reported to national regulatory authority/NCC-PvPI, IPC. 
 
 
2.9  Causality assessment 
 
The MAHs should preferably follow WHO-UMC causality assessment scale 
for establishing a causal relationship between the suspected drugs and 
Adverse Events .  
For WHO-UMC causality assessment scale, refer Appendix - A. 
 
2.10 Special population 
 
2.10.1  Use of a pharmaceutical product during pregnancy or 
breastfeeding 
 
Where during pregnancy, a woman has been exposed to any potential teratogenic 
medication, the follow up should be done till the delivery or child birth to assess 
the adverse outcome of maternal exposure. 
When an active substance (or one of its metabolites) has a long half-life, this 
should be taken into account when assessing the possibility of exposure of the 
embryo, if the pharmaceutical product was taken before conception. 
Reports of exposure to pharmaceutical products during pregnancy should contain 
as many detailed elements as possible in order to assess the causal relationship 
between any reported Adverse Events and the exposure to the suspected 
pharmaceutical product. 
Individual cases with an adverse outcome associated with a pharmaceutical 
product following exposure during pregnancy are classified as serious reports 
and should be reported: 
 Reports of congenital anomalies or developmental delay in foetus or child; 
 Reports of fetal death and spontaneous abortion; 
 Reports of serious suspected adverse reactions in the neonate. 
However, in certain circumstances, reports of pregnancy exposure with no 
suspected reactions may necessitate reporting. This may be a condition of the

marketing authorization or stipulated in the risk management plan; for example, 
pregnancy exposure to pharmaceutical products contraindicated in pregnancy or 
pharmaceutical products with a special need for surveillance because of a high 
teratogenic potential (e.g., thalidomide, isotretinoin). A signal of a possible 
teratogenic effect (e.g., through a cluster of similar abnormal outcomes) should 
be notified immediately to the regulatory authority/NCC-PvPI, IPC. 
Note: ADRs which occur in infants following exposure to a pharmaceutical 
product from breast milk should be reported. 
 
2.10.2  Use of a pharmaceutical product in pediatric or elderly 
population 
The collection of safety information in pediatric or elderly population is 
important. Reasonable attempts should therefore be made to obtain and submit 
the age or age group of the patient when a case is reported by a healthcare 
professional, or consumer in order to be able to identify potential safety signals 
specific to a particular population.

CHAPTER-3 
 
Preparation and Submission of Periodic Safety Update Report 
 
Contents: 
 
3.1   Introduction 
 
3.2   Objective 
 
3.3   General Principles 
 
3.4   Structure & Content

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Introduction 
The Periodic Safety Update Report is a document for evaluation of the benefit-
risk profile of a pharmaceutical product submitted by the MAH at defined time 
points as per Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and New Drugs & Clinical Trial 
Rules, 2019 there under during the post-marketing phase. 
3.2 Objective 
This chapter defines the recommended format, content and timelines of PSUR 
submission in conformity with New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules-2019 of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. PSURs are intended to be submitted to national 
regulatory authority and the MAH are also encouraged to submit the same in 
electronic format to NCC-PvPI, IPC in order to monitor the safety and efficacy of 
pharmaceutical products marketed in India. 
The main objective of a PSUR is to present a comprehensive, concise and critic al 
analysis of new or emerging information on the risks and benefits of the 
pharmaceutical products in approved indications. The PSUR, is therefore, a tool 
for post-marketing evaluation at defined time points in the life cycle of a 
pharmaceutical product. 
1. Post marketing assessment of new drug – 
 
(1) When a new drug is approved for marketing, assessment of safety and 
efficacy of the drug are generally based on data from a limited number of 
patients, many studied under the controlled conditions of randomized trials. 
Often, high risk patients and patients with concomitant illnesses that require 
use of other drugs are excluded from clinical trials, and long-term treatment 
data are limited. Moreover, patients in trials are closely monitored for 
evidence of adverse events. 
 
(2) In actual clinical practice, monitoring is less intensive, a broader range of  
patients are treated (age, co-morbidities, drugs, genetic abnormalities), and

of 70 
 events too rare to occur in clinical trials may be observed. Therefore, 
subsequent to approval of a new drug, the drug shall be closely monitored and 
post marketing assessment of its benefit-risk profile shall be carried out.  
 
(3) A person intending to import or manufacture any new drug for sale or 
distribution shall have a pharmacovigilance system in place for collecting, 
processing and forwarding the adverse drug reaction report to the Central 
Licencing Authority emerging from the use of the drug imported or 
manufactured or marketed by the applicant in the country. 
 
(4) The pharmacovigilance system shall be managed by qualified and trained 
personnel and the officer in-charge of collection and processing of data shall 
be a medical officer or a pharmacist trained in collection and analysis of 
adverse drug reaction reports. 
 
(5) Post marketing assessment of new drug may be carried out in different ways 
as under: - 
(A) Phase IV (Post marketing) trial - Phase IV (Post marketing) trial 
include additional drug-drug interactions, dose-response or safety studies 
and trials designed to support use under the approved indications, e.g. 
mortality or morbidity studies etc. Such trial will be conducted under an 
approved protocol with defined scientific objectives, inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, safety and efficacy assessment criteria etc. with the 
new drug under approved conditions for use in approved patient 
population. In such trial the ethical aspects for protection of rights, safety 
and well-being of the trial subjects shall be followed as per the regulatory 
provisions including that for compensation in case of clinical trial related 
injury or death and good clinical practices guidelines. In such study, the 
study drug may be provided to the trial subject free of cost unless 
otherwise there is specific concern or justification for not providing the 
drug free of cost, to the satisfaction of the Central Licencing Authority 
and the ethics committee. 
 
(B) Post marketing surveillance study or observational or non-
interventional study for active surveillance-  Such studies are 
conducted with a new drug under approved conditions of its use under a 
protocol approved by Central Licencing Authority with scientific 
objective. Inclusion or exclusion of subject are decided as per the 
recommended use as per prescribing information or approved package 
insert. In such studies the study drugs are the part of treatment of 
patient in the wisdom of the prescriber included in the protocol. The 
regulatory provisions and guidelines applicable for clinical trial of a new

of 70 
 drug are not applicable in such cases as drugs are already approved for 
marketing. 
 
(C) Post marketing surveillance through periodic safety update 
reports-  As part of post marketing surveillance of new drug the 
applicant shall furnish periodic safety update reports (PSURs) in 
accordance with the procedures as follows; 
(i) The applicant shall furnish periodic safety update reports (PSURs) in 
order to- 
a) report all relevant new information from appropriate sources;  
b) relate the data to patient exposure; 
c) summarise the market authorisation status in different countries and any 
significant variations related to safety; and  
d) indicate whether changes shall be made to product information in order to 
optimise the use of product.  
(ii) Ordinarily all dosage forms and formulations as well as indications for new 
drugs should be covered in one periodic safety update reports. Within the single 
periodic safety update reports separate presentations of data for different dosage 
forms, indications or separate population need to be given.  
(iii) All relevant clinical and non-clinical safety data should cover only  the period 
of the report (interval data). The periodic safety update reports shall be 
submitted every six months for the first two years after approval of the drug is 
granted to the applicant. For subsequent two years – the periodic safety update 
reports need to be submitted annually. Central Licencing Authority may extend 
the total duration of submission of periodic safety update reports if it is 
considered necessary in the interest of public health. Periodic safety update 
reports due for a period must be submitted within thirty calendar days of the 
last day of the reporting period. However, all cases involving serious unexpected 
adverse reactions must be reported to the Licencing Authority within fifteen 
days of initial receipt of the information by the applicant. If marketing of the 
new drug is delayed by the applicant after obtaining approval to market, such 
data will have to be provided on the deferred basis beginning from the time the 
new drug is marketed. Vaccines and biologicals always considered as new drugs, 
unless specified, otherwise, by the Licensing Authority. 
(iv) New studies specifically planned or conducted to examine a safety issue 
should be described in the periodic safety update reports. 
(v) A PSUR should be structured as follows:

of 70 
 (1) Title Page:  The title page of periodic safety update reports should capture 
the name of the drug; reporting interval; permitted indication of such drug; date 
of permission of the drug; date of marketing of drug; licensee name and address.  
(2) Introduction:  This section of periodic safety update reports should capture 
the reporting interval; drugs intended use, mode of action, therapeutic class, 
dose, route of administration, formulation and a brief description of the approved 
indication and population. 
(3) Current worldwide marketing authorisation status:  This section of 
periodic safety update reports should capture the brief narrative over view 
including details of countries where the drug is currently approved along with 
date of first approval, date of marketing and if product was withdrawn in any of 
the countries with reasons thereof. 
(4) Actions taken in reporting interval for safety reasons: 
In case, an already approved drug is in clinical trial for any other 
indication/purpose in India or abroad has been reported for any safety concern, 
periodic safety update reports should also include actions related to safety that 
have been taken during the reporting interval. This data should cover any safety 
concern arising from investigational uses, by the sponsor of the clinical trial (s), 
regulatory authorities, data monitoring committees, or ethics committees, 
besides the date of post marketing experience. 
(5) Changes to reference safety information (RSI):  This section should 
include any significant changes in reference safety information within the 
reporting interval. Such changes include information relating to 
contraindications, warnings, precautions, adverse events, and important findings 
from ongoing and completed clinical trials and significant non-clinical findings, if 
any. 
Note: Even if there is no significant change in RSI (Prescribing Information 
Leaflet & Company Core Data Sheet/Summary of Product Characteristics), 
MAHs should submit recent dated approved RSI as an Annexure. 
(6) Estimated patient exposure:  This section of periodic safety update reports 
should provide the estimates of the size and nature of the population exposed to 
the drug. Brief descriptions of the methods used to estimate the subject or 
patient exposure should be provided. 
6.1 Cumulative subject exposure in clinical trial  (Below points are taken 
from EMA guideline with permission VII.B.5.5.1).  
This section of the PSUR should include the following information in tabular 
format as referred below:

of 70 
  Cumulative numbers of subjects from ongoing and completed clinical trials 
exposed to the investigational pharmaceutical product, placebo, and/or active 
comparator(s) since the date of first approval for conducting an interventional 
clinical trial in any country (Refer Appendix-B, Table 01). 
 More detailed cumulative subject exposure in clinical trials should be 
presented, if available (e.g. sub-  grouped by age, sex, and racial/ethnic group) 
important differences among trials in dose, routes of administration, or 
patient populations can be noted in the tables, if applicable, or separate  
tables can be considered (Refer Appendix-B, Table No. 02 & 03); 
 Important differences among trials in dose, routes of administration, or 
patient populations can be noted in the tables, if applicable, or separate  
tables can be considered. 
 If, clinical trials have been or are being performed in special po pulation (e.g. 
pregnant women; patients with renal, hepatic, or cardiac impairment; or 
patients with relevant genetic polymorphisms), exposure data should be 
provided as appropriate. 
 When, there are substantial differences in the time of exposure between 
subjects randomized to the investigational pharmaceutical product or 
comparator(s), or disparities in length of exposure between clinical trials, it 
can be useful to express exposure in subject-time (subject-days, -months, or -
years). 
 New drug exposure in healthy volunteers might be less relevant to the overall 
safety profile, depending on the type of ADR, particularly, when subjects are 
exposed to a single dose. Such data can be presented separately with an 
explanation as appropriate. 
 If, the SAEs from clinical trials are presented by indication in the summary 
tabulations, the patient exposure should also be presented by indication, 
where available. 
 For individual trials of particular importance, demographic characteristic s 
should be provided separately, if available. 
 
6.2 Cumulative and interval patient exposure from Marketing 
Experience from India 
Interval patient exposure refers as the patient exposure occurring between 
two data lock points of PSUR. Separate estimations should be provided for 
interval exposure and, when possible, cumulative exposure (since the date of 
marketing authorization) from India. (Refer Appendix-B, Table No. 04 and 
05). The estimated number of patients exposed should be provided, when 
possible, along with the method(s) used to determine the same. If an estimate 
of the number of patients is not available, alternative estimated measures of 
exposure should be presented along with the method(s) used to derive them, if

of 70 
 available. Examples of alternative measures of exposure include patient-days 
of exposure and number of prescriptions. If applicable, data of special 
population and vulnerable population should be identified and submitted. 
The data should be presented according to the following categories: 
6.2.1  Post-approval exposure 
An overall estimation of patient exposure should be provided. In addition, the 
data should be presented by indication, sex, age, dose, formulation, and region, 
wherever applicable. Depending upon the product, other relevant variables, such 
as vaccinations, etc. should be described. Whenever, there are patterns of reports 
indicating a safety signal, exposure data within relevant subgroups should be 
presented, if possible. Some industries may be running some programmes for 
ensuring patient safety such as patient support programme, if in this 
programme, any safety concern or serious ADR is observed, it should also be 
communicated to NCC- PvPI.  
6.2.2  Post-approval use in special population 
Where the approved drug has been used in special population, the cumulative 
estimated patient exposure should be provided with method of calculation. 
Sources of such data may include  non-interventional studies designed to obtain 
this information, such as registries.  
The following are the examples of special population: 
• Paediatric population; 
• Elderly population; 
• Pregnant or lactating women; 
• Patients with hepatic and/or renal impairment; 
• Patients with other relevant co-morbidity; 
• Patients with disease severity different from that studied in clinical trials; 
• Sub-population carrying relevant genetic polymorphism(s); 
• Patients of different racial and/or ethnic origin; 
• Any other vulnerable population. 
6.2.3  Other post-approval use 
If the MAH becomes aware of any specific pattern of use of a pharmaceutical 
product, which may be relevant for assessment of product safety, a brief 
description should be provided. Examples of such patterns of use are drug abuse

of 70 
 (for example, some cough syrups, anti-histamines, pregabalin, are used for 
sedation), misuse (such as use of antibiotics in viral infection) and use beyond 
that recommended in the reference product information (e.g., an anti-epileptic 
drug used for neuropathic pain and/or prophylaxis of migraine headaches). 
6.3 Cumulative and interval estimated patient exposure from Marketing 
Experience from rest of the world. 
The estimations should be provided separately for interval exposure (since the 
data lock points of the previous PSUR) and, when possible, cumulative exposure 
from the date of approval in the rest of the world. (Refer Appendix-B, Table 06 
and 07). The data should be presented as mentioned in the section 6.2. 
7. Presentation of individual case histories:  This section of Periodic Safety 
Update Reports should include the individual case information available to a 
licence holder and provide brief case narrative, medical history, indica tion 
treated with suspect drug, causality assessment. Provide following 
information: 
7.1 Reference prescribing information 
In this section, an updated reference prescribing information of a new drug 
should be provided by the MAH. 
7.2 Individual cases received from India (Line listing of ICSRs) 
The line listing of ICSRs should at least contain the following information: age, 
gender, seriousness criteria, ADR start/stop date, therapy start/stop date of 
suspected/concomitant drug, dose, route of administration, indication of 
suspected/concomitant drug, relevant past medical history, outcome & causality 
assessment in tabulated form. 
7.3 Individual cases received from rest of the world 
In this section an Individual cases received from rest of the world should br 
provided by the MAH.  
7.4 Cumulative and interval summary tabulations of serious adverse 
events from clinical investigations. 
This section of the PSUR should provide a brief narration of the serious adverse 
events as mentioned in the appendix… ... background for the Appendix (example 
of Format need to be provided) that provides a cumulative summary tabulation 
of SAE reported in the MAHs, clinical trials, from the first authorization to 
conduct a clinical trial in any country worldwide to the data lock point of the 
current PSUR. The MAHs should explain any omission of data (e.g., clinical trial  
data might not be available for pharmaceutical products marketed for many

of 70 
 years). The tabulation(s) should be organized by SOC, for the new drug, as well 
as for the comparator arm(s) (active comparators, placebo) used in the clinical 
development programme. Data can be integrated across the programme. 
Alternatively, when useful and feasible, tabulations of SAEs can be presented by 
trial, indication, route of administration, or other variables. 
This section should not serve to provide analyses or conclusions based on the 
SAEs. 
• Appendix B, Table 8 provides cumulative tabulations of SAEs from clinical 
trials. While tabulating SAEs from clinical trials only those criteria should be 
used which are defined in NDCT Rules, 2019. This should not include non- 
serious adverse events.  
• The causality assessment, where has been done should also be mentioned as 
related and not-related. 
• While coding SAE (Table 8) and AE/ADR (Table 9) , Preferred Term (PT) and 
System Organ Class (S OC) should be used. 
7.5 Cumulative and interval summary tabulations from post-marketing 
data sources  
This section of the PSUR should provide background for the Appendix that 
provides cumulative and interval summary tabulations of ADRs from the date of 
marketing authorization to the data lock point of the current PSUR.  
The tabulation should include: 
• Serious and non-serious AEs/ADRs from spontaneous ICSR, including 
reports from HCPs, consumers, scientific literature, and regulatory 
authorities 
• Serious adverse drug reactions from non-interventional studies 
• Solicited reports of serious ADRs 
For special issues or concerns, additional tabulations of adverse drug reactions  
can be presented by indication, route of administration, or other variables. This 
section should not serve to provide analyses or conclusions based on the data 
presented (Refer Appendix-B, Table 09). 
8. Studies  
This section of PSURs should capture the brief summary of clinically important 
safety and efficacy findings obtained from the licence holder, sponsored clinical 
trials and published safety studies that became available during the reporting 
interval.  Whenever possible and relevant, data categorized by sex and age

of 70 
 (particularly children versus adult), indication, dose and region should be 
presented. 
MAH-sponsored post-marketing studies with the primary objective of 
identifying, characterizing, or quantifying a safety hazard, or confirming the 
safety profile of the pharmaceutical product that were completed or ongoing 
during the reporting interval should be included as an Appendix. The listing 
should include the following information: 
• Study ID (e.g., protocol number or another identifier); 
• Study title; 
• Study type (e.g., randomized clinical trial, cohort study, case-control 
study); 
• Study population (including country and other relevant population 
descriptors, e.g., paediatric population or trial subjects with impaired 
renal function); 
• Study initiation and completion date (as defined by the manufacturer 
and/or importer); 
• Status: Ongoing or Completed. 
8.1.1 Completed clinical study 
A brief summary of clinically important safety and efficacy findings obtained 
from completed trial during the reporting interval should be provided. This 
information can be presented in a narrative format or as a synopsis (Refer ICH-
E3). It could include information that supports or refutes previously identified 
safety concerns, as well as evidence of new safety signals. 
8.1.2  Ongoing clinical study 
If the manufacturer and/or importer is aware of clinically important information 
that has arisen from ongoing clinical trials (e.g. learned through interim safety 
analyses or as a result of unblinding of subjects with Adverse Events), this sub-
section should briefly summarize the concern(s). It could include information 
that supports or refutes previously identified safety concerns, as well as evidence 
of new safety signals. 
8.1.3  Long-term follow- up 
Wherever applicable, this sub-section should provide information from long-term 
follow-up of subjects  from clinical trials of new drugs, particularly advanced 
therapy products (e.g. gene therapy, cell therapy products and tissue engineering

of 70 
 and biotech products). These are referred as Advanced Therapy Medicinal 
Products (ATMPs). 
8.1.4  Other therapeutic uses of pharmaceutical product 
This should include clinically important safety information from othe r 
programmes, if and when conducted by the manufacturer and/or importer that 
follow a specific protocol (e.g., expanded access programmes, compassionate use 
programmes, particular patient uses and other organized data collection). 
8.1.5  New safety data related to Fixed Dose Combination therapies 
Unless otherwise specified by national regulatory authority requirements, the 
following data from combination therapies: 
• If the product that is the subject of a PSUR is also approved or under 
development as a component of a combination product or a multi-drug 
regimen, this section should summarize important safety findings from the 
use of the fixed dose combination therapy 
• If this PSUR is a combination product, this section should summarize 
important safety information arising from the individual components 
• The information specific to the combination can be incorporated into a 
separate section(s) of the PSUR for one or all of the individual components of 
the combination. 
8.2 Findings from non-interventional Studies 
This section should summarize relevant safety information or information 
with potential impact on the benefit or risk evaluations, from MAH -
sponsored non-interventional studies that became available during the 
reporting interval (e.g., observational studies, epidemiological studies, 
registries, and active surveillance programmes). This should include relevant 
information from drug utilization studies, when applicable to multiple 
regions. 
8.3 Information from other clinical trial sources 
8.3.1 Other clinical trials 
This sub-section should summarize information accessible with reasonable effort 
from any other clinical trial/study sources to the MAH during the reporting 
interval (e.g. including results from pooled analyses or meta-analyses of 
randomized clinical trials, and safety information provided by co- development 
partners or from investigator-initiated trials). 
8.3.2 Medication errors

of 70 
 This sub-section should summarize relevant information on patterns of 
medication errors and potential medication errors, even when not associated 
with adverse outcomes. This information may be received by the manufacturer 
and/or importer via spontaneous reporting systems, medical information queries, 
customer complaints, screening of digital media, patient support programmes, or 
other available information sources. 
8.4 Findings from non-Clinical Studies;  
This section should summarize major safety findings from non-clinical in vivo  
and in vitro  studies (e.g., carcinogenicity, reproduction, or immunotoxicity 
studies) ongoing or completed during the reporting interval. 
 
 
8.5 Findings from literature 
This section should summarize new and significant safety findings, either 
published in the scientific literature or made available as unpublished data, 
relevant to the approved pharmaceutical product that the manufacturer and/or 
importer became aware of during the reporting interval. 
Literature searches for PSUR should be as wide as possible and should also 
include studies reporting safety outcomes in groups of subjects and other 
products containing the same active substance. 
This should include: 
• Pregnancy outcomes (including termination) with or without adverse 
outcomes 
• Use in paediatric populations 
• Compassionate supply, named patient use 
• Lack of efficacy 
• Asymptomatic overdose, abuse or misuse 
• Medication error where no adverse events occurred 
Important non-clinical safety findings 
9. Other Information: This section of PSURs should include the details about 
signal and Risk Management Plan in place by licence holder (if any). (For 
detail please refer Module 6)

of 70 
 (a) Signal and risk evaluation: In this section, licence holder will provide the 
details of signal and risk identified during the reporting period and evaluation of 
signals identified during the reporting period.  
(b) Risk management plan: In this section, licence holder will provide the brief 
details of safety concern and necessary action taken by him to mitigate these 
safety concerns.  
9.1 Lack of efficacy in controlled clinical trials 
Data from clinical trials indicating lack of efficacy, or lack of efficacy relative to 
established therapy(ies), for pharmaceutical products intended to treat or 
prevent serious or life-threatening illnesses (e.g., excess cardiovascular AEs in a 
trial of a new anti-platelet drug for Acute Coronary Syndromes) could reflect a 
significant risk to the treated population and should be summarized in this 
section. 
 
9.2 Late-breaking information 
This section should summarize information on potentially important safety and 
efficacy/effectiveness findings that arise within 15 days after the data lock point 
of the PSUR in preparation. Examples include clinically significant new 
publications, important follow-up data, clinically relevant toxicological findings 
and any action that the manufacturer and/or importer, a data monitoring 
committee, or a regulatory authority has taken for the safety reasons.  
Any significant change proposed to the reference product information which has 
occurred after the data lock point of the report, but before submission should also 
be included in this section, where feasible. Such changes could include a new 
contraindication, warning/precaution, or new ADR. 
9.3 Overview of signals: new, ongoing, or closed 
A new signal is a signal that the MAH became aware of during the reporting 
interval. A new clinically important information on a previously closed signal 
that became available during the reporting period of the PSUR (i.e., a new aspect 
of a previously refuted signal or recognized risk likely to warrant further action 
to verify) would also constitute a new signal. New signals may be classified as 
closed or ongoing, depending on the status of signal evaluation at the data lock 
point of the PSUR. Examples would include new information on a previously: 
• Closed and refuted signal, which would result in the signal being re-opened; 
• Identified risk which is indicative of a clinically significant difference in the 
severity of the risk, e.g., transient increase in liver enzymes are identified

of 70 
 risks and new information is received indicative of a more severe outcome 
such as hepatic failure; neutropenia is an identified risk and a well-
documented and unconfined case report of agranulocytosis is received; 
• Identified risk for which a higher frequency of the risk is newly found, e.g., 
in a sub population; and 
• Potential risk which, if confirmed, would warrant a new warning, 
precaution, a new contraindication or restriction in indication(s) or 
population or other risk minimization activities. 
Refer Appendix-C, include a tabular listing of all signals ongoing or closed at the 
data lock points of the PSUR. 
When a regulatory authority has requested that a specific safety concern (not 
considered a signal) be monitored and reported in a PSUR, the MAH should 
summarize the result of the analysis of such safety concern in this section even if 
it is negative. 
10. Overall Safety Evaluation:  This section of PSURs should capture the 
overall safety evaluation of the drug based upon its risk benefit evaluation for 
approved indication.  
The purpose of this section is to provide: 
• Important identified risks; 
• Important potential risks; 
• Important missing information. 
• In case a signal was indicated in previous interval report and now has been 
refuted because of new evidences which resulted in closure, should be 
specifically mentioned here.  
• An evaluation of new information with respect to previously recognized 
identified and potential risks 
• An updated characterization of important potential and identified risks, 
where applicable and 
• A summary of the effectiveness of risk minimization activities (if any) in any 
country or region, which may have utility in other countries or regions. 
These evaluations of subsections should not summarize or repeat information 
presented in previous sections of the PSUR, but should instead provide an 
interpretation of the information, with a view towards characterizing the profile 
of those risks assessed as important.

of 70 
 10.2   Benefit Evaluation 
10.2.1 Important baseline efficacy/effectiveness information 
This section summarizes information on the efficacy/effectiveness of the 
pharmaceutical product as of the beginning of the reporting interval, and 
provides the basis for the benefit evaluation. This information should relate to 
the approved indication(s) of the pharmaceutical product listed in the reference 
product information 
For pharmaceutical products with multiple indications, population, and/or routes 
of administration, the benefit should be characterized separately by these 
factors, wherever relevant. The level of detail provided in this section should be 
sufficient to support the characterization of benefit in PSUR and the benefit-risk 
assessment. 
 
 
10.2.2  Newly identified information on efficacy/effectiveness 
Wherever necessary, for some products new information on efficacy/effectiveness 
in approved indications that may have become available during the reporting 
interval should be presented in this section.  
New information about efficacy/effectiveness in uses other than the approved 
indication(s) (off-label use) should not be included, unless relevant for the 
benefit-risk evaluation in the approved indication. 
Information on additional indications approved during the reporting interval 
should also be included in this section. New information on efficacy /effectiveness 
might also include changes in the therapeutic environment that could impact 
efficacy/effectiveness over time, e.g., vaccines, emergence of resistance to anti-
infective agents. 
10.2.3  Characterization of benefits 
This sub-section provides an integration of the baseline benefit information and 
the new benefit information that has become available during the reporting 
interval, for authorized indications. When there are no new relevant benefit 
data, this sub-section should provide a characterization of the information in 
sub-section "Important baseline efficacy and effectiveness information". 
When there is a clear information about the benefit and no significant change in 
the risk profile in this reporting interval, the integration of baseline and new 
information in this sub-section should be provided. This sub-section should

of 70 
 provide a concise but critical evaluation of the strengths and limitations of the 
evidence on efficacy and effectiveness, as follows: 
• A brief description of the strength of evidence of benefit, considering 
comparator(s), effect size, statistical rigor, methodological strengths and 
deficiencies, and consistency of findings across clinical trials/studies 
• New information that challenge the validity of a surrogate endpoint, if used 
• Clinical relevance of the effect size 
• Generalizability of treatment response across the indicated patient 
population, e.g., information that demonstrates lack of treatment effect in a 
sub-population 
• Adequacy of characterization of dose-response 
• Duration of effect 
• Comparative efficacy 
A determination of the extent to which efficacy findings from clinical trials are 
generalizable to patient populations treated in medical practice. 
10.3 Benefit risk analysis evaluation  
This section should provide an integration and critical analysis of the key 
information. This section also provides the benefit-risk analysis, and should not 
simply duplicate the benefit and risk characterization presented in subsections 
mentioned above. 
10.3.1  Benefit-Risk context- medical need and important alternatives 
This sub-section should provide a brief description of the medical need for the 
pharmaceutical product in the approved indications, and summarize alternatives 
(medical, surgical, or other; including no treatment). 
10.3.2  Benefit-Risk analysis evaluation 
A benefit-risk balances is specific to an indication and population. For products 
approved for more than one indication, benefit-risk profiles should be evaluated 
and presented for each indication individually. If there are important differences 
in the benefit-risk profiles among populations within an indication, benefit-risk 
evaluation should be presented by population, if possible. 
The benefit-risk evaluation should be presented and discussed in a way that 
facilitates the comparison of benefits and risks, and should take into account the 
following points:

of 70 
 • Whereas previous sections included all important benefit and risk 
information, not all benefits and risks contribute importantly to the overall 
benefit-risk evaluation. Therefore, the key benefits and risks considered in 
the evaluation should be specified. The key information presented in the 
previous benefit and risk sections should be carried forward for integration 
in the benefit-risk evaluation. 
• Consider the context of use of the pharmaceutical product: the condition to 
be treated, prevented, or diagnosed; its severity and seriousness; and the 
population to be treated. 
• With respect to key benefit(s), consider its nature, clinical importance, 
duration, and generalizability, as well as evidence of efficacy in non-
responders to other therapies and alternative treatments. Consider the effect 
size. If there are individual elements of benefit, consider all (e.g., for 
therapies for arthritis: reduction of symptoms and inhibition of radiographic 
progression of joint damage). 
• With respect to risk, consider its clinical importance, e.g., nature of toxicity, 
seriousness, frequency, predictability, preventability, reversibility, impact on 
patients, and whether it arose from off-label use, a new use, or misuse. 
• The strengths, weaknesses, and uncertainties of the evidence should be 
considered when formulating the benefit-risk evaluation. Describe how 
uncertainties in the benefits and risks impact the evaluation. Limitations of 
the assessment should be described. 
Provide a clear explanation of the methodology and reasoning used for benefit- 
risk evaluation: 
• The assumptions, considerations, and judgement or weighing that support 
the conclusions of the benefit-risk evaluation, should be clear. 
• If a formal quantitative or semi-quantitative assessment of benefit-risk is 
provided, a summary of the methods should be included. 
• Economic considerations (e.g., cost-effectiveness) should not be included in 
the benefit-risk evaluation. 
Note: When there is important new information or an ad hoc PSUR has been 
requested, a detailed benefit-risk analysis is warranted. 
Conversely, where little new information has become available during the 
reporting interval, the primary focus of the benefit-risk evaluation might consist 
of an evaluation of updated interval safety data. 
11. Conclusion:

This section of PSURs should provide the details on the safety profile of drug (s) 
and necessary action taken by the license holder in this regard.  
Based on the evaluation of the cumulative safety data, and the benefit-risk 
analysis, the manufacturer and/or importer should assess the need for further 
changes to the reference product information and propose changes as 
appropriate. In addition, and as applicable, the conclusion should include 
preliminary proposal(s) to optimize or further evaluate the benefit-risk balance, 
for further discussion with the national regulatory authority. This may include 
proposals for additional risk minimization activities. These proposals should also 
be considered for incorporation into the Risk Management Plan. 
12. Appendix : The appendix includes the copy of marketing authorization in 
India, copy of prescribing information, line listings with narrative of 
Individual Case Safety Reports. 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
Quality Management System at Marketing Authorization Holder 
Organization 
Contents: 
4.1 Introduction 
 
4.2 Scope 
 
4.3 Structures and Processes 
 
4.4 Specific quality system procedures and processes

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Introduction 
This module contains guidance for the Marketing Authorization Holders for the 
establishment, maintenance, performance, performance and quality assurance of 
PV system. 
4.2 Scope 
This guidance document is applicable to all MAHs who hold marketing 
authorization for manufacture or import of pharmaceutical products in Indian 
market. 
4.3  Structures and Processes 
4.3.1  Pharmacovigilance system 
All MAH should have the PV system which should comply with the quality 
management system including requirements of NDCT Rules 2019, Schedule M of 
the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940, and Rules thereunder. 
The PV system at MAH should have an organogram describing PV personnel ’s 
roles and responsibilities, procedures, processes and resources, including 
management of resources, compliance and records (Refer Chapter 1 for more 
details). 
4.3.2  Quality Management System (QMS) of PV 
The QMS in PV is a framework of policies, procedures and system necessary to 
ensure quality related to detection, assessment, understanding, evaluation and 
prevention of adverse events on pharmaceutical products. 
The quality management system is based on the following activities:

of 70 
  Quality planning: Establishing structures of PV system, planning, effective 
integration and consistent processes for safety; 
 Quality adherence: Carrying out tasks and responsibilities in accordance with 
quality requirements such as collection of ICSRs, completeness of report, case 
narrative, data management, causality assessment, signal management, etc.;  
 Quality control and assurance: By monitoring the parameters described 
under quality adherence; 
 Quality improvements: Taking Corrective and Preventive measures, as and 
when required, to ensure patient safety. 
 
4.3.3  Requirements and Responsibilities of QMS at MAH site 
MAH should have a sufficient number of competent and appropriately qualified, 
and trained personnel for the performance of PV activities. 
In case, where MAH has completely outsourced the PV activities, through a valid 
contract, the outsourced agency/institution should comply with the above 
statement. The responsibility of adhering to PV QMS will ultimately lie with 
MAH. 
The managerial staff in the organization should be responsible for compliance of 
PV Guidance Document for MAHs of Pharmaceutical Products. 
4.3.4  Training of MAH personnel for PV 
The personnel involved in PV activities should receive induction (within one 
month of joining and continued trainings with proper evaluation of performance, 
thereafter. The organization should maintain the training plans and records of 
trainings. The organization should keep identifying the continued training 
needs. 
4.3.5  Facilities and equipment for PV 
Achieving the required quality for the conduct of PV processes and their 
outcomes is also intrinsically linked with appropriate facilities and equipment 
used to support the processes. Facilities and equipment should include office 
space, Information Technology (IT) systems and storage space (electronic). They 
should be located, identified, designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to 
suit their intended purpose in line with the quality objectives for PV System.  
Facilities and equipment which are critical for the conduct of PV should be 
subject to appropriate checks, qualification and/or validation activities to prove 
their suitability for the intended purpose. 
4.4  Specific quality system procedures and processes 
 
4.4.1  Compliance management by MAH

of 70 
 For the purpose of compliance, MAHs should have specific quality system 
procedures and processes in place in order to ensure the following:   
•Continuous monitoring of PV data,  the examination of options for risk 
minimization and prevention and that appropriate measures are taken by the 
MAH (refer Chapter 6 for detailed information) 
•Scientific evaluation of all information on the risks of pharmaceutical products 
as regards patients or public health, in particular as regards adverse reactions in 
human beings arising from use of the product within or outside the terms of its 
marketing authorization or associated with occupational exposure (refer 
Chapters 2, 3 and 6 for detailed information) 
•Submission of accurate and verifiable data on all ADRs to the regulatory 
authority/NCC-PvPI, IPC within the legally required time-limits (refer Chapters 
2 and 6 for detailed information) 
•Quality, integrity and completeness of the information s ubmitted on the risks of 
pharmaceutical products, including processes to avoid duplicate submissions and 
to validate signals (refer Chapters 2, 3 and 6 for detailed information) 
•Effective communication with regulatory authority, including communication 
on new or changed risks, the PVMF (refer Chapter 1 for detailed information), 
risk management systems (refer Chapter 6 for detailed Information), PSURs 
(refer Chapter 3 for detailed information) and CAPAs (refer Chapters l & 5 for 
detailed information). 
4.4.2  Record management 
The MAH shall record all PV information and ensure that it is handled and 
stored so as to allow accurate reporting, interpretation and verification of that 
information. 
As part of a record management system, specific measures should, therefore be 
taken at each stage in the storage and processing of PV data to ensure data 
security and confidentiality. This should involve strict limitation of access to 
documents and to databases to authorized personnel respecting the medical and 
administrative confidentiality of the data. The electronic copies of the PV records 
should be stored indefinitely. Time line to store hard copies need to be confirmed 
with CDSCO. 
4.4.3  Documentation of the quality system 
All elements, requirements and provisions adopted for the quality system should 
be documented in a systematic and orderly manner in the form of written 
policies and procedures. For the requirements of documenting the quality system 
(refer Chapter 1 for detailed information). 
4.4.4  Critical PV processes

of 70 
 The following PV processes should be considered as critical: 
• Benefit-risk evaluation; 
• Establishing, assessing & implementing risk management systems and 
evaluating the effectiveness of risk minimization; 
• Collection, processing, management, quality control, follow-up for missing 
information, coding, classification, duplicate detection, evaluation and timely 
electronic transmission of ICSRs from any source; 
• Signal management; 
• Scheduling, preparation (including data evaluation and quality control), 
submission and assessment of PSURs; 
• Interaction between the PV and product quality defect systems; 
• Communication about safety concerns between MAHs and licensing 
authority in particular notifying changes to the benefit-risk balance of 
pharmaceutical products; 
• Communicating information to patients and healthcare professionals about 
changes to the benefit-risk balance of pharmaceutical products for the aim of 
safe and effective use of pharmaceutical products; 
• Keeping product information up- to-date with the current scientific 
knowledge, including the conclusions of the assessment and 
recommendations from the regulatory authority; 
• Implementation of variations to marketing authorizations for safety reasons 
according to the urgency required. 
• Provisions for events that could severely impact on the organization's staff 
and infrastructure in general or on the structures and processes for PV in 
particular; and 
• Back-up systems for urgent exchange of information within an organization, 
amongst organizations sharing PV tasks as well as between MAHs and 
competent authorities. 
 
4.4.5  Monitoring the effectiveness of QMS in PV  
 
The QMS in PV should be continuously monitored for its effectiveness by the 
MAH through the following processes:  
 
• System reviews by those responsible for management  
• Audits 
• Compliance monitoring 
• Inspections 
• Evaluating the effectiveness of actions taken with pharmaceutical products 
for the purpose of minimizing risks and supporting their safe and effective 
use in patients. 
 
The organization may use performance indicators to continuously monitor 
the good performance of PV activities in relation to the quality 
requirements. The requirements for the quality system itself are laid out in 
this Chapter and its effectiveness should be monitored by managerial staff, 
who should review the documentation of the quality system at regular

intervals with the frequency and the extent of the reviews to be determined 
in a risk-based manner. 
Reviews of the quality system should include the review of SOPs and work 
instructions, deviations from the established quality system, audits and 
inspections reports as well as the use of the indicators referred to above. 
 
4.4.6  Responsibilities of the MAH in relation to the PVOIC for PV 
 
Refer Chapter 1 for detailed information. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
Audit & Inspection of Pharmacovigilance System at Marketing 
Authorization Holder Organization 
 
Contents:  
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 Objectives  
5.3 Inspection Types  
5.4 Inspection Procedure  
5.5 Regulatory Actions  
5.6 Training Inspectors

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter provides insights into planning, conducting, reporting and 
follow-up of PV inspections by regulatory authorities/officials responsible for 
inspection. 
 
5.2 Objectives 
The objectives of PV audits and inspections are as below: 
 
 To verify by examination and evidence, the appropriateness of the 
implementation and operation of the PV system including its quality 
system s. 
 To assess and establish that the MAH has qualified personnel, robust 
system and facilities to conduct PV activities 
 To identify, record and address non-compliance, which may pose a risk 
to public health 
 To take regulatory action, wherever considered necessary based on the 
result of the inspections/audits. 
The results of an inspection will be provided to the inspected MAH, who will 
be given the opportunity to comment on any non-compliance identified. Any 
non-compliance should also be rectified by the MAH within two months 
through the implementation of CAPA plan. 
5.3 Inspection Types 
The Inspections of PV can be routine or targeted to MAHs suspected of being 
non-compliant. 
5.3.1 Routine inspection

of 70 
 These inspections are planned and informed inspection of the PV system of 
MAH. The focus of these inspections is to determine that the MAH has 
personnel, systems and facilities in place to meet the regulatory PV 
obligations for the marketed pharmaceutical products in India. 
These inspections are prioritized on the risk-based approach. 
5.3.2 Targeted inspections 
These inspections are conducted as and when there is trigger and the 
regulatory authority determines that inspection is the appropriate way. 
Triggering factors for such type of inspections are as below (but not limited 
to): 
 Continuous delays or omission and poor-quality reporting of I 
CSRs/PSURs/RMPs. 
 Failure to provide the asked information or data within the deadline 
specified by regulatory authority. 
 Delays or failure to carry out specific obligations related to the 
monitoring of pharmaceutical product safety, identified at the time of 
the marketing authorization. 
 Delays in the implementation or inappropriate implementation of 
CAPAs. 
 Sudden pharmaceutical product withdrawal and recall. 
 
5.4 Inspection Procedure 
5.4.1 Inspection Planning 
 
PV inspection should be based on a systematic and risk-based approach to 
make the best use of surveillance and enforcement resources whilst 
maintaining a high level of public health protection. A risk-based approach to 
inspection planning will enable the frequency and scope of inspections to be 
carried out. 
The PV inspection team will be made by CDSCO including representative(s) 
from PvPI . 
The inspection will be planned based on the following: 
 Compliance history identified during previous PV inspections. 
 Re-inspection date recommended by the inspectors or assessors as a 
result of a previous inspection 
 MAH with sub-contracted PV activities (qualified person responsible 
for PV functions in India, reporting of safety data, etc.) and multiple 
firms employed to perform PV activities;

 Changes to the PV safety database(s), which could include a change in 
the database itself or associated databases, the validation status of the 
database as well as information about transferred or migrated data; 
 Changes in contractual arrangements with PV service providers or the 
organizations at which PV is conducted; 
 Delegation or transfer of PSMF management. 
 Change of PVOIC since the last inspection. 
5.4.2 Organization to be inspected 
Any party carrying out PV activities in whole or in part, on behalf of, or in 
conjunction with the MAH may be inspected, in order to confirm their capability 
to support the MAH's compliance with PV obligations. 
 
 
Chapter  6 
 
Submission of Risk Management Plan 
 
Contents: 
 
6.1 Introduction 
 
6.2 Objectives 
 
6.3 Contents of RMP

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Introduction 
At the time of marketing authorization, information on the safety of a 
pharmaceutical product is relatively limited as the clinical studies ar e carried 
out in aa relatively small number of subjects, restricted population in terms 
of age, gender, ethnicity, restricted co-morbidity, restricted co-medication, 
restricted conditions of use, relatively short duration of exposure and follow 
up. 
A pharmaceutical product is authorized on the basis that at the time of 
authorization, the benefit-risk balance is positive. The product may have 
multiple risks of varying degree associated with it and individual risks wil l 
vary from product to product. All actual or potential risks might not have 
been identified at the time of initial authorization. Many risks will only be 
discovered and characterised during post-marketing phase. 
 
The aim of Risk Management Plan (RMP) is to document the risk 
management system considered necessary to identify, characterise and 
minimise a pharmaceutical product ’s important risks. The Risk Minimization 
strategy involves continuous monitoring of efficacy and safety profile-Risk 
Identification, Risk Assessment, Risk Characterization, Risk Communication 
and Risk Mitigation. 
 
Objectives 
 Identification and characterization of risk to update the safety profile 
of the pharmaceutical product(s); 
 Indicate how to characterize further the safety profile of the 
pharmaceutical product(s);

of 70 
  Document measures to prevent or minimize the risks associated with a 
pharmaceutical product, including an assessment of the effectiveness of 
interventions; 
 Document post-marketing obligations that have been imposed as a 
condition of the marketing authorization; 
 Document any change in the risk profile of a pharmaceutical product(s) 
after marketing authorization. 
The RMP document is a dynamic, stand-alone document which should be 
updated throughout the life-cycle of a pharmaceutical products.  
The Licence holder will provide the details of safety concern and necessary 
action taken by him to mitigate any safety concern in the applications of 
PSUR. 
 
6.2 Description of RMP 
6.2.1 Pharmaceutical product overview 
The MAH should provide an overview of a pharmaceutical product including: 
 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient(s) information, name of MAH, date 
and country of first launch/authorization worldwide (if applicable), 
chemical class, indication (s), mechanism of action, route of 
administration, pharmaceutical form and strength. 
 Information on the excipients used in the formulation of a 
pharmaceutical product should be provided. 
 Administrative information on the RMP such as data lock point, date 
submitted and version number of all parts of RMP. 
 
6.2.2 Safety specifications 
The MAH should provide a synopsis of the safety profile of a pharmaceutical 
product(s) and should include, what is known and unknown about the 
pharmaceutical product(s) safety. The safety specification consists of 
following subsections: 
 
6.2.2.1 Epidemiology, indication (s) and target population(s): 
This section should include incidence, prevalence, mortality and relevant co-
morbidity, and should whenever possible be stratified by age, sex, and raci al 
and/or ethnic origin. 
 
6.2.2.2 Non-clinical part of the safety specifications: 
This section should present a summary of important non-clinical safety 
findings like toxicity related information, interactions etc. 
 
6.2.2.3 Clinical trial exposure:

of 70 
 This section includes the data on the patients studied in clinical trials. This 
should be stratified for relevant categories (age, gender, indication, ethnicity, 
exposure to special population-paediatric, geriatric etc.) and also by the ty pe 
of clinical trial.  
 
6.2.2.4 Populations not studied in clinical trials: 
This section describes, which sub-populations within the expected target 
population have not been studied or have only been studied to a limited 
degree in the clinical trial population. Limitations of the clinical trials should 
also be presented in terms of the relevance of exclusion criteria such as 
paediatric population, geriatrics population, pregnant/lactating women, 
hepatic /renal impairment patients etc. 
 
6.2.2.5 Post-marketing experience: 
This section should provide information on the number of patients exposed 
during post-marketing phase; how the pharmaceutical product has been used 
in clinical practice, labelled and off-label use including use in the spec ial 
populations mentioned above? This should also include any action taken by 
any regulatory authority/MAH for safety reason. 
6.2.2.6 Identified and potential risks:  
This section provides information on the important identified and potential 
risks associated with the use of a pharmaceutical product and potential 
Adverse Events/Adverse Reactions with other pharmaceutical products, foods, 
other substances, and the important pharmacological class effects. 
The risk data should include frequency, public health impact, risk factors, 
preventability, potential mechanism, evidence source/strength. 
 
6.2.2.7 Summary of the safety concerns:  
At the end of the RMP document, summary of the "Safety concerns/measures" 
of pharmaceutical products should be provided. 
 
6.2.3 PV activities  
MAH should list the various PV activities involved to identify a new safety 
concern or further characterize known safety concerns or investigation of 
potential safety concerns, whether it is real or not and how missing 
information will be sought? PV activities can be divided into routine PV 
activities and additional PV activities. For each safety concern, the MAH 
should list their planned PV activities for that concern. PV plans should be 
proportionate to the risks of the product. If routine PV is considered sufficient 
for post-marketing safety monitoring, without the need for additional actions 
(e.g. safety studies) "routine PV" should be carried out against the safety 
concern.

6.2.4 Risk minimization activities 
The MAH should have the updated Package inserts, Product labelling, 
Product Information Leaflet (PIL), pack size, risk minimization activities. 
The MAH should also consider when appropriate to have additional Risk 
minimization activities like educational material, communication letter to 
Healthcare Professionals (HCPs) etc. 
For each safety concern, the following information should be provided: 
 Objectives of the risk minimization activities; 
 Routine risk minimization activities; 
 Additional risk minimization activities (if any), individual objectives 
and justification, 
 How the effectiveness of each (or all) risk minimization activities will 
be evaluated in terms of attainment of their stated objectives? 
 What the target is for risk minimization? i.e. what are the criteria for 
judging success? 
 Milestones for evaluation and reporting. 
 
 
 
References: 
 
1. Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940  
2. New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules 2019 
3. PvPI Guidance for Spontaneous reporting Document 
4. Guidance for Industry on Pharmacovigilance Requirements for 
Biological Products-CDSCO 
5. ICH Guideline: E2E: Pharmacovigilance Planning 
6. ICH-E2C (R2): Periodic Benefit-Risk Evaluation Report 
7. ICH-E2D: Post-Approval Safety Data Management: Definition in 
Standards for Expedited Reporting 
8. ICH-E3: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Report 
9. Good Pharmacovigilance Practices (GVP) of European Union 
10. WHO- UMC: Global Pharmacovigilance

of 70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices:  
Appendix A:  
WHO-UMC causalit y assessment scale  
 
Causality Term Assessment Criteria* 
 
 
Certain  • Event or laboratory test abnormality, with plausible time 
relationship to drug intake  
• Cannot be explained by disease or other drugs  
• Response to withdrawal plausible (pharmacologically, 
pathologically)  
• Event definitive pharmacologically or 
phenomenologically (i.e. an objective and specific 
medical disorder or a recognized pharmacological 
phenomenon)  
• Rechallenge satisfactory, if necessary  
 
Probable / 
Likely  • Event or laboratory test abnormality, with reasonable 
time relationship to drug intake  
• Unlikely to be attributed to disease or other drugs  
• Response to withdrawal clinically reasonable  
• Rechallenge not required

of 70 
  
Possible  • Event or laboratory test abnormality , with reasonable 
time relationship to drug intake  
• Could also be explained by disease or other drugs  
• Information on drug withdrawal may be lacking or 
unclear  
 
Unlikely  • Event or laboratory test abnormality, with a time to drug 
intake that makes a relationship improbable (but not 
impossible)  
• Disease or other drugs provide plausible explanations  
 
Conditional/ 
Unclassified  • Event or laboratory test abnormality  
• More data for proper assessment needed, or 
• Additional data under examination  
 
Unassessable / 
Unclassifiable  • Report suggesting an adverse reaction  
• Cannot be judged because information is insufficient or 
contradictory  
• Data cannot be supplemented or verified  
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B:  
 
Example of summary tabulations  
Note: These examples can be modified by manufacturer and/or importer to 
suit specific situations, as appropriate.  
Table 01:   Estimated cumulative subject exposure from clinical 
trials  
 
Treatment Number of Subjects 
Pharmaceutical product   
Compa rator  
Placebo  
 
Estimates of cumulative subject exposure,  based upon  actual exposure  
data from completed clinical trials and the enrolment /randomization 
schemes for ongoing trials.  
Table 02:   Cumulative subject exposure to new drug from 
completed clinical trials by age and sex *

Number of Subjects 
Age Range Male Female Total 
    
    
Table 03:    Cumulative subject exposure to new drug from completed 
clinical trials by racial/ethnic group*  
 
Racial/Ethnic Group Number of Subjects 
Asian  
Black  
Caucasian   
Other   
Unkn own  
Total   
 
*Data from completed trial as of [date] 
 
Table 04:  Cumulative exposure from marketing experience from 
India  
 
Indication Sex Age Dose (mg/day) Formulation 
 Male Female 2 to 16 > 16 to 65 > 65 Unknow
n < 40 ≥ 40 Unknow
n Intraven
ous Oral Others 
 
Overall 
             
 
Depression 
             
 
Migraine

includes cumulative data obtained from month/day /year through month /day/year, 
where available  
Table 05: Interval exposure from marketing experience from India  
Indication Sex Age Dose (mg/day) Formulation 
 Male Female 2 to 16 > 16 to 65 > 65 Unknow
n < 40 ≥ 40 Unknow
n Intraven
ous Oral Others 
 
Depression 
             
 
Migraine  
             
 
Includes interval data obtained from month/day /year through month/day /year, 
where available  
Table 06: Cumulative exposure from marketing experience from 
rest of the world  
Indication Sex Age Dose 
(mg/day) Formulati
on ROW 
(which ever 
applicable) 
 Male Female 2 to 16 > 16 to 65 > 65 Unknown < 40 ≥ 40 Unknown Intravenous Oral Others EU Japan Mexico US/Canada Other 
 
Overall                  
 
Depression

of 70 
 Includes cumulative data obtained from month /day/year through month /day/year, 
where available  
Table 07: Interval exposure from marketing experience from rest o f 
the world  
Indication Sex Age Dose 
(mg/day
) Formulati
on ROW 
(which ever 
applicable) 
 Male Female 2 to 16 > 16 to 65 > 65 Unknown < 40 ≥ 40 Unknown Intraveno
us Oral Others EU Japan Mexico US/Canad
a Other 
 
Depression                  
 
Migraine                   
 
Includes interval data obtained from month/day /year through month/day /year, 
wherever available  
Table 08: Cumulative tabulations of Serious Adverse Events from 
clinical trials  
 
System Organ 
Class Investigational 
Pharmaceutical 
Product Active 
Comparator Placebo Causality 
Assessment 
(Related 
(R) and Not 
related 
(NR) 
Preferred Term Listed  Not 
Listed Listed  Not 
Listed   
Blood and 
lymphatic 
system 
disorders       
Anemia           
Bone Marrow 
Necrosis       
Cardiac

of 70 
  
Table 09: Number of ADRs using the term (System Organ Class (SOC) 
and preferred term (PT) from Post-Marketing Sources  
 
 Report Sources (Literature, Spontaneous, 
solicited or any other) Non-
interventional 
post-marketing 
sources 
Serious Non-serious Total 
Spontane
ous Serious  
Interv
al 
 Cumul
ative Interv
al Cumul
ative  Interv
al Cumula
tive 
SOC 1        
PT        
        
SOC 2        
PT        
Appendix C:  
 
Tabular Summary of Safety Signals that were ongoing or closed during the reporting 
Interval (Reporting Interval: DD -MM -YYYY to DD-MM -YYYY)  
Signa
l 
term* Date 
detecte
d @ Status 
(ongoin
g or 
closed)
# Date 
closed 
(for 
closed 
signals)
* Source of 
Signal** Reason for 
evaluation 
& 
summary 
of key data 
@@ Method of 
signal 
evaluation Action(s) 
taken or 
planned## 
Strok
e MM/YY
Y Ongoing MM/YY
Y Meta 
analysis 
(published 
trials) Statistically 
significant 
increase in 
frequency Review 
meta-
analysis 
and 
available 
data Pending 
SJS MM/YY
Y Closed MM/YY
Y Spontaneo
us case 
reports & 
one case 
report in 
Phase IV Rash 
already an 
identified 
risk SJS not 
reported in 
pre Targeted 
follow up of 
reports with 
site visit to 
one 
hospital.  RSI 
updated 
with a 
Warning 
and 
Precaution disorders 
Tachycardia       
Ischemic 
cardiomyopathy

trial authorizatio
n CTs. 4 
apparently 
unconfound
ed reports 
within 6 
months of 
approval; 
plausible 
time to 
onset Full review 
of cases by 
manufactur
er and/or 
importer 
dermatologi
st and 
literature 
searches DHPC sent 
to 
oncologists 
Effectivene
ss survey 
planned 6 
months 
post DHPC. 
RMP 
updated. 
 
*Signal term: A brief descriptive name of a medical concept for the signal. The description 
may evolve and be refined as the signal is evaluated. The concept and scope may, or may 
not, be limited to specific term(s), depending on the source of signal.  
@ Date detected (month/year): Month and year the manufacturer and/or importer 
became aware of the signal.  
#Status: Ongoing: Signal under evaluation at the data lock point of the PSUR . Provide 
anticipated completion date, if known; closed: Signal for which evaluation was completed 
before the data lock point of the PSUR  
 
Note: A new signal of which the manufacturer and/or importer became aware during the 
reporting interval may be classified as closed or ongoing, depending on the status of signal 
evaluation at the data lock point of the PSUR.  
$ Date closed (month/year): Month and year when the signal evaluation was 
completed.  
**Source of signal: Data or information source from which a signal arose. Examples 
include, but may not be limited to, spontaneous Adverse Event Reports, clinical trial data, 
scientific literature, non-clinical study results, or information requests or inquiries from a 
regulatory authority . 
@@ Reason for evaluation: A brief summary of key data and rationale for further 
evaluation . 
## Actions taken or planned: State whether or not a specific action has been taken or is 
planned for all closed signals that have been classified as potential or identified risks . If 
any further actions are planned for newly or previously identified signals under 
evaluation at the data lock point, these should be listed. Otherwise leave blank for ongoing 
signals . 
Appendix D:  
 
PSUR Summary Report Checklist

of 70 
 S. 
No. Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) 
Checklist Description Status Page 
No. 
1. Product for which PSUR submitted    
1.1 Biologics    
1.2 Therapeutic Product    
1.3 Fixed Dose Combinations    
1.4 Other    
2. PSUR Submitted To    
2.1 CDSCO    
2.2 NCC-PvPI, IPC    
2.3 AEFI     
3. Reason for PSUR Submission    
3.1 Significant change in what is known about the risks 
and benefits    
3.2 Requested Periodic    
3.3 Requested Ad-Hoc    
3.4 Voluntary List reasons 
(e.g. New 
safety 
information)   
4. Status in India    
4.1 Marketed (since)    
4.2 Non-marketed    
5. PSUR Information    
5.1 Executive summary    
5.2 Date of marketing authorization     
5.3 Period covered by the present PSUR    
5.4 Period covered by the previous PSUR     
6. Appendices (indicate if included in the 
submission)    
6.1 Reference Safety Information    
6.2 Cumulative summary tabulation of serious AEs 
from clinical trials and interval/cumulative 
summary tabulations from marketed experience     
6.3 Tabular summary of safety signals    
6.4 Listing of interventional and non-interventional 
studies with a primary objective of post-marketing

of 70 
 safety monitoring  
6.5 List of the sources of information used to prepare 
the PSUR    
 
Appendix E:  
 
Definitions: 
 
Adverse Drug Reactions 
(ADR)  A response to a drug which is noxious and unintended , and 
which occurs at doses normally used in humans for the 
prophylaxi s, diagnosis , or therapy of dis ease , or for the 
modification of physiological function (WHO, 1972)  
Adverse Event (AE)  Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product 
and which does not necessarily hav e to have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.  
Benefit - risk analysis  Examination of the favorable (beneficial) and unfavorable 
results of undertaking a specific course of action. (While this 
phrase is still commonly used , the more logical pairings of 
benefit harm and effectiveness-risk ar e slowly replacing it) . 
Causality assessment  The evaluation of the likelihood that a medicine was the 
causative agent of an observed adverse reaction . Causality 
assessment is usually m ade according to established algorithms.  
Company Core Data Sheet 
(CCDS)  A document prepared by the MAH containing , in addition to 
safety  
in format ion , material related to indications , dosing , 
pharmacology and other information concerning the product.  
Company Core Safety 
Information (CCSI)  All relevant safety information contained in the CCDS prepared 
by the MAH and which the MAH requires to be listed in all 
countries where the company markets the drug, except when the 
local regulatory authority specifically requires a modification. It 
is the reference information by which listed and unlisted are 
determined for the purposes of periodic reporting for marketed 
products, but not by which expected ad unexpected are 
determined for expedited reporting.  
Clinical trial  A systematic study on pharmaceutical products on human 
subjects (whether pati ents or non-pati ent volunt eers) in ord er to 
discov er or v erify the clinical , pharmacological (including 
pharmacodynamics / pharmacokinetics) and /or adverse effects, 
with the objective of determining their safety and/or efficacy .

of 70 
 Identified risk  An untoward occurrence for which there is adequate evidence of 
an association with th e pharmaceutical product of interest. 
Examples of identified risks include:  
• An adverse reaction adequately demonstrat ed in nonclinical 
studies and confirmed by clinical data;  
• An adverse reaction observed in well-designed clinical trials or 
epidemiological studies for which the magnitude of the 
difference compared with the comparator group (placebo or 
active substance) on a parameter of int erest suggests a causal 
relationship ; and an adverse reaction suggested by a number of 
well 
An adverse reaction suggested by a number of well 
documented spontaneous reports where causality is strongly 
supported by temporal relationship and biological plausibility , 
such as anaphylactic reactions or application site reactions.  
Individual Case Safety 
Report (ICSR)  A report that contains information describing a suspected ADR 
related to the administration of one or more pharmaceutical 
products to an individual patient.  
Investigational drug  The term investigational drug is used in this guideline to 
indicate only the experimental product under study or 
development  
New Drug  According to New Drugs and Clinical Trials rule 2019-   
“new drug ” means,― (i ) a drug, including active pharmaceutical 
ingredient or phytopharmaceutical drug, which has not been used 
in the country to any significant extent, except in accordance with 
the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder, as per 
conditions specified in the labelling thereof and has not been 
approved as safe and efficacious by the Central Licencing 
Authority with respect to its claims;  
or  
(ii) a drug approved by the Central Licencing Authority for 
certain claims and proposed to be marketed with modified or new 
claims including indication, route of administration, dosage and 
dosage form;  
or  
(iii) a fixed dose combination of two or more drugs, approved 
separately for certain claims and proposed to be combined for the 
first time in a fixed ratio, or where the ratio of ingredients in an 
approved combination is proposed to be changed with certain 
claims including indication, route of administration, dosage and 
dosage form; or  
(iv) a modified or sustained release form of a drug or novel drug 
delivery system of any drug approved by the Central Licencing 
Authority; or  
(i) a vaccine, recombinant Deoxyribonucleic Acid (r-DNA) 
derived product, living modified organism, monoclonal anti-
body, stem cell derived product, gene therapeutic product or

of 70 
 xenografts, intended to be used as drug; 
Explanation.― The drugs, other than drugs referred to in sub -
clauses (iv) and (v), shall continue to be new drugs for a period of 
four years from the date of their permission granted by the 
Central Licencing Authority and the drugs referred to in sub-
clauses (iv) and (v) shall always be deemed to be new drugs; 
Marketing Authorization 
Holder (MAH)  For the purpose of this guidance document,  Marketing 
Authorization Holder (MAH) refers to the manufacturer or the 
importer of the drug, who has valid manufacturing or import 
license . 
Post-marketing  The stage when a drug is generally available on the market.  
Potential Risk  An untoward occurrence for which there is some basis for 
suspicion of an association with the medicinal product of 
interest but where this association has not been confirmed. 
Examples of potential risks include: non-clinical safety concerns 
that have not been  
• Observed or resolved in clinical studies; adverse events 
observed in clinical trials or  
• Epidemiological studies for which the magnitude of the 
difference, compared with the comparator group (placebo or 
active substance, or unexposed group), on the parameter of 
interest raises a suspicion of , but is not large enough to 
suggest , a causal relationship; an event which is known to be 
associated with other  
• Products of the same class or which could be expected to occur 
based on the properties of the medicinal product.  
PSUR  The Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) is a stand-alone 
document that allows a periodic but comprehensive assessment 
of the worldwide safety data of a pharmaceutical product.

Reference Safety 
Information (RSI)  All relevant safety information contained in the reference 
product information (e .g., CCDS) prepared by the MAH and 
which the MAH requires to be listed in all countries where the 
company markets the drug , except when the local regulatory 
authority specifically requires a modification. It is a subset of 
information contained within the MAH's reference product 
information for the PBRER. Where the reference product 
information is the Company Core Data Sheet (CCDS) , the 
reference safety information is the Company Core Safety 
Information (CCSI) . 
Serious Adverse Event  A serious adverse event or reaction is any untoward medical 
occurrence that at any dose:  
results in death  
results in life-threatening condition  
requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization  
results in persistent or significant 
disability /incapacity is a congenital 
abnormality/birth defect  
Side effect  Any unintended outcome that seems to be associated with 
treatment, including negative or positive effects. This term has 
come to be used exclusively in the sense of 'adverse effect'; this 
loses the important dimension of potential reference to 
unintended positive effects as well as linguistically masking the 
adverse element of a negative side effect.  
Solicited reports  Solicited reports are those derived from organized data 
collection systems , which include clinical trials, registries, post-
approval named patient use programs, other patient support 
and disease management programs , surveys of patients or 
healthcare providers, or information gathering on efficacy or 
patient compliance . 
Spontaneous Report  An unsolicited communication to a company , regulatory 
authority , or other organization that describes an ADR in a 
patient given one or more medicinal products and which does not 
derive from a study or any organized data collection scheme.  
Signal  Information that arises from one or multiple sources (including 
observations and experiments), that suggests a new potentially 
causal association, or a new aspect of a known association, 
between an intervention and an event or set of related events, 
either adverse or beneficial , that is judged to be of sufficient 
likelihood to justify further action to verify.  
Summary of Product 
Characteristics  A regulatory document attached to the marketing authorization 
which forms the basis of the product information made available

