ACT , 1954  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment  of certain diseases and disorders . 
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs . 
5. Prohibition of advertisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and disorders . 
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from, India of certain ad vertisements.  
7. Penalty . 
8. Powers of entry, search, etc . 
9. Offences by companies . 
9A. Offences to be cognizable.  
10.   Jurisdiction to try offences.  
 10A. Forfeiture.  
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants . 
12. Indemnity . 
13. Other laws not affected . 
14. Savings.  
15. Power to exempt from application of Act . 
16. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE .

ACT , 1954  
ACT NO. 21 OF 19541 
[30th April,  1954.]  
An Act to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases, to prohibit the advertisement for 
certain purposes of remedies alleged to possess magic qualities and to provide for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be c alled the Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, and applies also to persons domiciled in the territories to 
which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by Notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) „advertisement ‟ includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document, and any 
announcement made orally or by any means of producing or transmitting light, sound or smoke;  
(b) „drug‟ includes — 
(i) a medicine for the internal or external use of human beings or a nimals;  
(ii) any substance intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or 
prevention of disease in human beings or animals;  
(iii) any article, other than food, intended to affect or influence in any way the structure or 
any org anic function of the body of human beings or animals;  
(iv) any article intended for use as a component of any medicine , substance or article, referred 
to in sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii); 
(c) „magic remedy ‟ includes a talisman, mantra, kavacha , and any other charm of any kind which 
is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or 
prevention of any disease in human beings or animals or for affecting or influencing in any way the 
structure or any organic funct ion of the body of human beings or animals;  
4[(cc) „registered medical practitioner ‟ means any person, — 
(i) who holds a qualification granted by an authority specified in, or notified under        
section  3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 191 6) specified in the Schedules to the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956); or  
(ii) who is entitled to be registered as a medical practitioner under any law for the time being 
in force in any State to which this Act extends relating to the registr ation of medical practitioner;]  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, sec. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963), and extended to the State of 
Sikkim, vide S.O. 949 (E), dated 20th October, 1988.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
   (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. 1st April, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 511, dated 26th Fe bruary, 1995, see Gazette of India, 1955, P art II,                       
s. 3.

(d) „taking any part in the publication of any advertisement ‟ includes— 
(i) the printing of the advertisement,  
(ii) the publication of any advertisement outside the territories to which this Act extends by or 
at the instance  of a person residing within the said territories;  
1*                           *                          *                           *                            *                                 *  
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for tre atment of certain diseases and 
disorders. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any 
advertisement referring to any drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the use of that drug 
for— 
(a) the procurement of miscarriage in women or prevention of conception in women; or  
(b) the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for sexual pleasure; or  
(c) the correction of menstrual disorder in women; or  
2[(d) the diagnosis, cure, mit igation, treatment or prevention of any disease, disorder or condition 
specified in the Schedule, or any other disease, disorder or condition (by whatsoever name called) 
which may be specified i n the rules made under this Act : 
Provided that no such rule shall be made except — 
(i) in respect of any disease, disorder or condition which requires timely treatment in 
consultation with a registered medical practitioner or for which there are normally no accepted 
remedies; and  
(ii) after consultation with the Dru gs Technical Advisory Board constituted under the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), and if the Central Government considers necessary, with 
such other persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Ayurvedic or 
Unani syste ms of medicines as that Government deems fit.]  
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs. —Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement relating to a drug if the 
advertiseme nt contains any matters which — 
(a) directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true character of the drug; or  
(b) makes a false claim for the drug; or  
(c) is otherwise false or misleading in any material particular.  
5. Prohibition of adve rtisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and 
disorders. —No person carrying on or purporting to carry on the profession of administering magic 
remedies shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any magic r emedy which 
directly or indirectly claims to be efficacious for any of the purposes specified in section 3.  
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from, India of certain advertisements. —No person 
shall import into, or export from, the territories to whi ch this Act extends any document s containing an 
advertisement of the nature referred to in section  3 or in section  4 or section  5, and any document 
containing any such advertisements shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been 
prohibited under section  19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 ( 8 of 1878), and all the provisions of that Act 
shall have effect accordingl y, except that section  183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word „shall ‟ 
therein the word „may‟ were substituted.  
7. Penalty. —Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act  3[or the rules made thereunder ] 
shall, on conviction, be punishable — 
                                                           
1. Clause ( e) omitted by Act 42 of  1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 17-12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -12-1963).

(a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both;  
(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both.  
1[8. Powers of en try, search, etc. —(1) Subject to the provisions of any rules made in this behalf, any 
Gazetted Officer authorised by the State Government may, within the local limits of the area for which he 
is so authorised, — 
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times,  with such assistants, if any, as he considers necessary, 
any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being 
committed;  
(b) seize any advertisement which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provision s of 
this Act:  
Provided that the power of seizure under this clause may be exercised in respect of any document, 
article or thing which contains any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such 
document, article or thing, if the advertisemen t cannot be separated by reason of its being embossed 
or otherwise , from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, utility or saleable 
value thereof;  
(c) examine  any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause (a) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The provisio ns of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to search or seizure made under the authority of a 
warrant issued under section  98 or the said Code.  
(3) Where an y person seizes anything under c lause (b) or clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as 
soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]  
9. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person contravening any of the provisions of thi s Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and s hall be liable to be proceeded against, a nd punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence was comm itted with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) „company ‟ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) „director ‟ in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
2[9A. Offences to be cognizable. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 5, for s. 8 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).

10. Jurisdiction to try offences.—No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
1[10A. Forfeiture. —Where a person has been convicted by any Court for contravening any provision 
of this Act or any rule made thereunder, the Court may direct that any document  (including all copies 
thereof), article or thing, in respect of which the contravention is made, including the contents thereof 
where such contents are seized under clause  (b) of sub -section (1) of section 8, shall be forfeited to the 
Government.]  
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants. —Every person authorized under section  8 shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 186 0). 
12. Indemnity. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
13. Other laws not affected. —The provisions of this Act are in addition to, and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
2[14. Savings. —Nothing in this Act shall apply to — 
(a) any signboard or notice displayed by a registered medical practitioner on his premises 
indicating that treatment for any disease, disorder or condition specified in section  3, the Schedule or 
the rules made under this Act is undertaken in those premises; or  
(b) any treatise or book dealing with any of the matters specified in  section  3 from a bonafide 
scientific or social standpoint; or  
(c) any advertisement relating to any drug sent confidentially in the manner prescribed under 
section 16 only to a registered medical practitioner; or  
(d) any advertisement relating to a drug p rinted or published by the Government; or  
(e) any advertisement relating to a drug printed or published by any person with the previous 
sanction of the Government granted prior to the commencement of the Drugs and Magic Remedies 
(Objectionable Advertisemen ts) Amendment Act, 1963 (42 of 1963):  
Provided that the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw the sanction 
after giving the person an opportunity of showing cause against such withdrawal.]  
15. Power to exempt from application of A ct.—If, in the opinion of the Central Government, public 
interest requires that the advertisement of any specified drug or class of drugs 3[or any specified class of 
advertisement s relating to drugs] should be permitted, it may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette , 
direct that the provisions of sections  3,4,5 and 6 or any one of such provisions shall not apply‟  or shall 
apply subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification to or in relation to the 
advertisement of any such drugs or class of drugs 3[or any such class of advertisement s relating to drugs].  
16. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power; such rules may — 
(a) specify any 4[disease, disorder or condition] to which the provisions of section 3 shall apply;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 7 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for s ection  14 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -12-1963).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “disease or condition ” (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).

(b) prescribe  the manner in which advertisements of articles or things referred to in clause  (c) of 
1* * * section 14 may be sent confidentially.  
2[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament whil e it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
 
  
                                                           
1. The words, brackets and figure “sub-section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 42 of 1963, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963) . 
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).

1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section s 3(d) and 14]  
 
S. No. Name of the disease, disorder or condition  
 1. Appendicitis.  
 2. Arteriosclerosis.  
 3. Blindness  
 4. Blood poisoning.  
 5. Bright ‟s disease.  
 6. Cancer  
 7. Cataract.  
 8. Deafness.  
 9. Diabetes.  
10. Diseases and disorders of the brain.  
11. Diseases and disorders of the optical system  
12. Diseases  and disorders of the uterus  
13. Disorders of menstrual flow.  
14. Disorders of the nervous system.  
15. Disorders of the prostatic gland.  
16. Dropsy.  
17. Epilepsy.  
18. Female diseases (in general)  
19. Fevers (in general).  
 20. Fits. 
21. Forms and structure of the female bust.  
22. Gall stones, kidney stones and bladder stones.  
23. Gangrene  
  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 42 of 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).

24. Glaucoma.  
25. Goitre.  
26. Heart diseases.  
27. High or low blood pressure.  
28. Hydrocele.  
29. Hysteria.  
30. Infantile paralysis.  
31. Insanity.  
32. Leprosy.  
33. Leucoderma.  
34. Lockjaw.  
35. Locomotor ataxia.  
36. Lupus.  
37. Nervous debility.  
38. Obsesity.  
39. Paralysis.  
40. Plague.  
41. Pleurisy.  
42. Pneumonia.  
43. Rheumatism.  
44. Ruptures.  
45. Sexual impotence.  
46. Smallpox.  
47. Stature of persons.  
48. Sterility in women.  
49. Trachoma.  
50. Tuberculosis.

S. No.  Name of the disease, disorder or condition  
52. Typhoid fever.  
53. Ulcers of gastrointestinal tracts.  
                 
54.     
 Venereal diseases, including syphilis, gonorrhea, soft chancre, venereal granuloma and 
lympho granuloma.]  
 
________